---
position: 6
label: "II. We are in possession of certain _a priori_ cognitions, and even the common understanding is never without them"
depth: 2
aa_page: 28
---

## {{{ 28 }}} II. We are in possession of certain _a priori_ cognitions, and even the common understanding is never without them

What matters here is a criterion by which we can securely distinguish a pure cognition from an empirical one. Experience teaches us, to be sure, that something is constituted thus and so, but not that it could not be otherwise. **First**, then, if a proposition is found which is thought at the same time with its ***necessity***, then it is an _a priori_ judgment; if, moreover, {{{ 29 }}} it is not derived from any proposition except one which is itself in turn valid as a necessary proposition, then it is absolutely _a priori_. **Secondly**: Experience never gives its judgments true or strict, but only assumed and comparative ***universality*** (through induction), so {{ 4 }} that it must properly be said: as far as we have perceived hitherto, there is no exception to this or that rule. If, therefore, a judgment is thought in strict universality, i.e., in such a way that no exception at all is allowed as possible, then it is not derived from experience, but is valid absolutely _a priori_. Empirical universality is thus only an arbitrary increase of validity from that which holds in most cases to that which holds in all, as for example in the proposition: all bodies are heavy; whereas where strict universality essentially belongs to a judgment, there this indicates a special source of cognition for it, namely a faculty of _a priori_ cognition. Necessity and strict universality are thus secure criteria of an _a priori_ cognition, and also belong inseparably to one another. But since in their use it is sometimes easier to show the empirical limitation of judgments than the contingency in them, or it is also sometimes more illuminating to show the unconditioned universality that we ascribe to a judgment than its necessity, it is advisable to employ the two aforementioned criteria separately, each of which is by itself infallible.

Now that there actually are such necessary and in the strictest sense universal, and hence pure _a priori_ judgments in human cognition, is easy to show. If one wants an example from the sciences, one need only look at all the propositions of mathematics; if one wants such an {{ 5 }} example from the most common use of the understanding, the proposition that every alteration must have a cause can serve for this; indeed, in the latter case the very concept of a cause so obviously contains the concept of a necessity of connection with an effect and of a strict universality of the rule, that it would be entirely lost if one sought to derive it, as Hume did, from a frequent association of that which happens with that which precedes, and from a habit arising therefrom (hence a merely subjective necessity) of connecting representations. One could also, without needing such examples for the proof of the actuality of pure _a priori_ principles in our cognition, establish their indispensability for the possibility of {{{ 30 }}} experience itself, and hence demonstrate it _a priori_. For where would experience itself get its certainty, if all the rules according to which it proceeds were always in turn empirical, and hence contingent; hence one can hardly allow these to count as first principles. However, here we can content ourselves with having set forth the pure use of our cognitive faculty as a fact, together with its criteria. But an _a priori_ origin of some of them shows itself not merely in judgments, but even in concepts. Remove from your empirical concept of a ***body*** everything that is empirical in it, the color, the hardness or softness, the weight, even the impenetrability, there still remains the ***space*** that it (which has now entirely disappeared) {{ 6 }} occupied, and this you cannot omit. Likewise, if you remove from your empirical concept of every corporeal or incorporeal object all properties that experience teaches you: you still cannot take away from it that property by which you think it as a ***substance*** or as ***inhering*** in a substance (even though this concept contains more determination than that of an object in general). You must therefore, convinced by the necessity with which this concept forces itself upon you, confess that it has its seat in your cognitive faculty _a priori_.