---
position: 8
label: "IV. Of the difference between analytic and synthetic judgments"
depth: 2
aa_page: 33
---

## {{{ 33 }}} IV. Of the difference between analytic and synthetic judgments

In all judgments in which the relation of a subject to the predicate is thought (if I consider only the affirmative, for the application to the negative is easy afterwards), this relation is possible in two different ways. Either the predicate _B_ belongs to the subject _A_ as something that is (covertly) contained in this concept _A_; or _B_ lies entirely outside the concept _A_, though to be sure it stands in connection with it. In the first case I call the judgment ***analytic***, in the other ***synthetic***. Analytic judgments (the affirmative ones) are therefore those in which the connection of the predicate with the subject is thought through identity, but those in which this connection is thought without {{ 11 }} identity are to be called synthetic judgments. The former could also be called ***judgments of clarification***, the latter ***judgments of amplification***, because the former add nothing through the predicate to the concept of the subject, but only break it up by means of analysis into its component concepts, which were already thought in it (although confusedly): whereas the latter add to the concept of the subject a predicate which was not thought in it at all and by no analysall {{{ 34 }}} bodies are extended, then this is an analytic judgment. For I do not need to go beyond the concept that I connect with the word body in order to find extension connected with it, but rather I need only analyze that concept, i.e., merely become conscious of the manifold that I always think in it, in order to encounter this predicate therein; it is therefore an analytic judgment. On the contrary, if I say: all bodies are heavy, then the predicate is something entirely different from that which I think in the mere concept of a body in general. The addition of such a predicate thus yields a synthetic judgment.

***Judgments of experience as such are altogether synthetic.*** For it would be absurd to ground an analytic judgment on experience, because I do not need to go outside my concept at all to formulate the judgment, and therefore have no need of any testimony from experience for it. That a body is extended is a proposition that stands certain _a priori_ {{ 12 }}, and not a judgment of experience. For before I go to experience, I already have all the conditions for my judgment in the concept, from which I can merely extract the predicate in accordance with the principle of contradiction, and thereby at the same time become conscious of the necessity of the judgment, which experience would not even teach me. On the contrary, even though I do not at all include the predicate of weight in the concept of a body in general, that concept nevertheless designates an object of experience through a part of it, to which I can therefore still add other parts of this very same experience as belonging to the former {{{ 35 }}}. I can initially cognize the concept of body analytically through the characteristics of extension, impenetrability, shape, etc., all of which are thought in this concept. But now I amplify my cognition, and looking back to the experience from which I had abstracted this concept of body, I find weight also always connected with the above characteristics, and therefore I add this synthetically as a predicate to that concept. It is therefore experience upon which the possibility of the synthesis of the predicate of weight with the concept of body rests, because both concepts, although the one is not contained in the other, nevertheless belong to one another, though only contingently, as parts of a whole, namely of experience, which is itself a synthetic connection of intuitions.

But in the case of synthetic judgments _a priori_, this aid is entirely {{ 13 }} lacking. If I am to go beyond the concept _A_ in order to cognize another concept _B_ as connected with it: what is that upon which I rely, and by which the synthesis becomes possible, since I here do not have the advantage of looking around for it in the field of experience? Take the proposition: Everything that happens has its cause. In the concept of something that happens, I do indeed think an existence preceded by a time, etc., and analytic judgments can be drawn from this. But the concept of a cause lies entirely outside that concept, and indicates something different from that which happens, and is therefore not contained at all in this latter representation. How then do I come to say something entirely different about that which happens in general, and to cognize the concept of cause, even though not contained in it, as nevertheless belonging to it and even belonging to it necessarily? What is the unknown = x here, upon which the understanding relies when it believes it finds outside the concept of A a predicate B foreign to it, {{{ 36 }}} which it nevertheless considers to be connected with it? It cannot be experience, because the adduced principle has added this second representation to the first not only with greater universality than experience can provide, but also with the expression of necessity, and hence entirely _a priori_ and from mere concepts. Now the entire ultimate aim of our speculative cognition _a priori_ rests on such synthetic, i.e., ampliative principles; for the analytic {{ 14 }} ones are indeed highly important and necessary, but only in order to attain that clarity of concepts which is requisite for a secure and extensive synthesis, as a genuinely new acquisition.