---
position: 15
label: "Section 1. Of Space"
depth: 3
aa_page: 51
---

## {{{ 51 }}} {{ 37 }} Section 1. Of Space

## § 2. Metaphysical Exposition of this Concept.

By means of outer sense (a property of our mind) we represent to ourselves objects as outside us, and all of these together in {{{ 52 }}} space. Therein is their shape, magnitude, and relation to one another determined or determinable. Inner sense, by means of which the mind intuits itself or its inner state, yields, to be sure, no intuition of the soul itself as an object; yet it is nevertheless a determinate form under which alone the intuition of its inner state is possible, so that everything belonging to the inner determinations is represented in relations of time. Time cannot be intuited externally, any more than space can be intuited as something in us. What, then, are space and time? Are they actual entities? Are they only determinations or also relations of things, but yet such as would belong to them even in themselves even if they were not intuited, or are they such as adhere only to the form of intuition alone, and consequently to the subjective constitution {{ 38 }} of our mind, without which these predicates could not be ascribed to any thing at all? In order to instruct ourselves on this, we will first expound the concept of space. I understand, however, by ***exposition*** (_expositio_) the clear (even if not detailed) representation of that which belongs to a concept; but the exposition is ***metaphysical*** when it contains that which represents the concept as ***given*** _a priori_.

1) Space is no empirical concept that has been drawn from outer experiences. For in order that certain sensations be referred to something outside me (i.e., to something in another place in space than that in which I find myself), and similarly in order that I be able to represent them as outside and next to one another, consequently not merely as different but as in different places, the representation of space must already ground them. Accordingly, the representation of space cannot be borrowed from the relations of outer appearance through experience, but rather this outer experience is itself possible only through the aforementioned representation in the first place.

2) Space is a necessary representation _a priori_ that grounds all outer intuitions. One can never represent to oneself that there is no space, though one can very {{ 39 }} well think that no objects are to be encountered in it. It is {{{ 53 }}} therefore regarded as the condition of the possibility of appearances, and not as a determination dependent upon them, and is a representation _a priori_ that necessarily grounds outer appearances.

3) Space is no discursive or, as one says, general concept of relations of things in general, but a pure intuition. For, first, one can represent to oneself only a single space, and if one speaks of many spaces, one understands thereby only parts of one and the same unique space. These parts, moreover, cannot precede the single all-encompassing space as if they were its constituent parts (from which its composition were possible), but can only be thought ***in it***. It is essentially single, and the manifold in it, consequently also the general concept of spaces in general, rests solely on limitations. From this it follows that in respect of it an intuition _a priori_ (which is not empirical) grounds all concepts of it. Thus also all geometric principles, e.g., that in a triangle two sides together are greater than the third, are never derived from general concepts of line and triangle, but rather from intuition, and indeed _a priori_ with apodictic certainty.

4) Space is represented as an infinite ***given*** magnitude. {{ 40 }} Now one must indeed think of every concept as a representation that is contained in an infinite multitude of different possible representations (as their common mark), and consequently contains these ***under itself***; but no concept as such can be so thought as if it contained an infinite multitude of representations ***within itself***. Nevertheless, space is so thought (for all parts of space ad infinitum are simultaneous). Therefore, the original representation of space is an ***intuition*** _a priori_, and not a ***concept***.

## {{{ 54 }}} § 3. Transcendental Exposition of the Concept of Space.

I understand by a ***transcendental exposition*** the explanation of a concept as a principle from which the possibility of other synthetic cognitions _a priori_ can be understood. For this purpose it is required: 1) that such cognitions actually flow from the given concept, 2) that these cognitions are possible only under the presupposition of a given way of explaining this concept.

Geometry is a science which determines the properties of space synthetically and yet _a priori_. What, then, must the representation of space be, in order that such a cognition of it is possible? It must originally be {{ 41 }} intuition; for from a mere concept no propositions can be drawn that go beyond the concept, which is nevertheless what happens in geometry (Introduction V). But this intuition must be encountered in us _a priori_, i.e., before all perception of an object, and must therefore be pure, not empirical intuition. For geometric propositions are collectively apodictic, i.e., connected with the consciousness of their necessity, e.g., space has only three dimensions; such propositions, however, cannot be empirical or judgments of experience, nor be inferred from them (Intro. II).

How can an outer intuition inhabit the mind, which precedes the objects themselves, and in which the concept of the latter can be determined _a priori_? Obviously not otherwise than insofar as it has its seat solely in the subject, as the formal constitution of the same to be affected by objects and thereby to acquire ***immediate representation*** of them, i.e., ***intuition***, and thus only as the form of outer ***sense*** in general.

Thus our explanation alone makes the ***possibility*** of geometry as a synthetic cognition _a priori_ comprehensible. Any way of explaining that does not yield this, even if it seemed to have some similarity to it, can most safely be distinguished from it by this characteristic.

## {{{ 55 }}} {{ 42 }} Conclusions from the Above Concepts.

a) Space represents no property at all of any things in themselves, nor does it represent them in their relation to one another, i.e., no determination of them that adheres to objects themselves, and that would remain even if one abstracted from all subjective conditions of intuition. For neither absolute nor relative determinations can be intuited prior to the existence of the things to which they belong, and thus not _a priori_.

b) Space is nothing other than merely the form of all appearances of outer senses, i.e., the subjective condition of sensibility, under which alone outer intuition is possible for us. Since the receptivity of the subject to be affected by objects necessarily precedes all intuitions of these objects, it can be understood how the form of all appearances can be given in the mind prior to all actual perceptions, and thus _a priori_, and how it, as a pure intuition in which all objects must be determined, can contain principles of their relations prior to all experience.

We can therefore speak of space, of extended beings, only from the standpoint of a human being. If we depart from the subjective condition under which alone we can acquire outer intuition, namely, as we may be affected by objects, then {{ 43 }} the representation of space signifies nothing at all. This predicate is ascribed to things only insofar as they appear to us, i.e., are objects of sensibility. The constant form of this receptivity, which we call sensibility, is a necessary condition of all relations in which objects are intuited as outside us, and, if one abstracts from these objects, a pure intuition, which bears the name of space. Because we cannot make the special conditions of sensibility into conditions of the possibility of things, but only of their appearances, we can indeed say that space encompasses all things that may appear to us externally, but not all things in themselves, whether they are intuited or not, or by whatever subject they may be. For we cannot judge at all of the intuitions of other thinking beings, {{{ 56 }}} whether they are bound to the same conditions that limit our intuition and are universally valid for us. If we add the limitation of a judgment to the concept of the subject, the judgment then holds unconditionally. The proposition: "All things are next to one another in space," holds under the limitation that these things are taken as objects of our sensible intuition. If I here add the condition to the concept and say: "All things as outer appearances are next to one another in space," then this rule holds universally {{ 44 }} and without limitation. Our expositions therefore teach the ***reality*** (i.e., the objective validity) of space in respect of everything that can present itself to us externally as an object, but at the same time the ***ideality*** of space in respect of things when they are considered in themselves by reason, i.e., without taking into account the constitution of our sensibility. We therefore assert the ***empirical reality*** of space (in respect of all possible outer experience), yet at the same time the ***transcendental ideality*** of the same, i.e., that it is nothing as soon as we leave aside the condition of the possibility of all experience and take it as something that grounds things in themselves.

But there is also, besides space, no other subjective representation referred to something external that could be called objective _a priori_. For from none of these can one derive synthetic propositions _a priori_ as one can from intuition in space (§ 3). Hence, strictly speaking, no ideality at all belongs to them, even though they agree with the representation of space in that they belong merely to the subjective constitution of the kind of sense, e.g., of sight, hearing, and feeling, through the sensations of colors, sounds, and warmth, which, however, because they are merely sensations and not intuitions, do not in themselves allow any object to be cognized, least of all _a priori_.

{{ 45 }} The intention of this remark is only to prevent one from thinking of illustrating the asserted ideality of space with entirely inadequate examples, since, namely, colors, taste, etc., are with right considered not as qualities of things, but merely as {{{ 57 }}} alterations of our subject, which can even be different in different people. For in this case that which is originally itself only appearance, e.g., a rose, is considered in an empirical sense as a thing in itself, which can yet appear different to every eye in respect of color. By contrast, the transcendental concept of appearances in space is a critical reminder that in general nothing that is intuited in space is a thing in itself, nor is space a form of things that were perhaps inherent in them in themselves, but rather that the objects in themselves are not known to us at all, and that which we call outer objects are nothing other than mere representations of our sensibility, of which space is the form, but whose true correlative, i.e., the thing in itself, is not thereby cognized at all, nor can it be, but also of which in experience no question is ever asked.
