---
position: 16
label: "Section 2. Of Time"
depth: 3
aa_page: 57
---

## {{{ 57 }}} {{ 46 }} Section 2. Of Time

## 4. Metaphysical Exposition of the Concept of Time.

Time is no empirical concept that has been drawn from any experience. For coexistence or succession would not even come into perception if the representation of time did not ground them _a priori_. Only under its presupposition can one represent to oneself that several things exist at one and the same time (simultaneously) or in different times (successively).

2) Time is a necessary representation that grounds all intuitions. In respect of appearances in general, one cannot take time itself away, though one can very well take appearances out of time. Time is therefore given _a priori_. In {{{ 58 }}} it alone is all actuality of appearances possible. These can collectively fall away, but time itself (as the general condition of their possibility) cannot be abolished.

3) {{ 47 }} On this _a priori_ necessity is also grounded the possibility of apodictic principles of the relations of time, or axioms of time in general. It has only one dimension: different times are not simultaneous, but successive (just as different spaces are not successive, but simultaneous). These principles cannot be drawn from experience, for the latter would yield neither strict universality nor apodictic certainty. We would only be able to say: so common perception teaches; but not: so it must be. These principles hold as rules under which experiences in general are possible, and instruct us prior to them, and not through them.

4) Time is no discursive or, as it is called, general concept, but a pure form of sensible intuition. Different times are only parts of one and the same time. A representation that can only be given through a single object, however, is an intuition. Moreover, the proposition that different times cannot be simultaneous could not be derived from a general concept. The proposition is synthetic and cannot arise from concepts alone. It is therefore immediately contained in the intuition and representation of time.

5) The infinity of time signifies nothing more than that every determinate {{ 48 }} magnitude of time is possible only through limitations of a single, grounding time. Therefore, the original representation ***time*** must be given as unlimited. But where the parts themselves and every magnitude of an object can be represented as determinate only through limitation, there the entire representation cannot be given through concepts (for they contain only partial representations); rather, immediate intuition must ground them.

## {{{ 59 }}} § 5. Transcendental Exposition of the Concept of Time.

I can therefore refer to No. 3, where, for the sake of brevity, I have placed that which is properly transcendental under the articles of the metaphysical exposition. Here I will only add that the concept of alteration, and with it the concept of motion (as alteration of place), is possible only through and in the representation of time; and that if this representation were not an _a priori_ (inner) intuition, no concept, whichever it might be, could make comprehensible the possibility of an alteration, i.e., of a combination of contradictorily opposed predicates (e.g., the being in a place and the not-being of one and the same thing in the very same place) in one and the same object. Only in time can both {{ 49 }} contradictorily opposed determinations be encountered in one thing, namely, ***successively***. Thus our concept of time explains the possibility of as many synthetic cognitions _a priori_ as are exhibited by the general doctrine of motion, which is not a little fruitful.

## § 6. Conclusions from these Concepts.

a) Time is not something that would subsist for itself, or adhere to things as an objective determination, and thus remain if one abstracted from all subjective conditions of its intuition; for in the first case, it would be something that, without any actual object, would yet be actual. As regards the second, however, as a determination or order adhering to things themselves, it could not precede the objects as their condition, and be cognized and intuited _a priori_ through synthetic propositions. The latter, on the contrary, occurs very well if time is nothing but the subjective condition under which all intuitions can take place in us. For then this form of inner intuition can be represented prior to the objects, and thus _a priori_.

b) Time is nothing other than the form of inner sense, i.e., of the intuition of our self and our inner state. For {{{ 60 }}} {{ 50 }} time cannot be a determination of outer appearances; it belongs neither to a shape nor a position, etc.; on the contrary, it determines the relation of representations in our inner state. And precisely because this inner intuition yields no shape, we also seek to remedy this lack through analogies, and represent the temporal sequence through a line progressing to infinity, in which the manifold constitutes a series that is of only one dimension, and we conclude from the properties of this line to all the properties of time, with the sole exception that the parts of the former are simultaneous, but those of the latter are always successive. From this it is also clear that the representation of time is itself an intuition, since all its relations can be expressed in an outer intuition.

c) Time is the formal _a priori_ condition of all appearances in general. Space, as the pure form of all outer intuition, is limited as an _a priori_ condition merely to outer appearances. On the contrary, because all representations, whether they have outer things as objects or not, nevertheless in themselves, as determinations of the mind, belong to the inner state; and this inner state belongs under the formal condition of inner intuition, and thus of time: time is an _a priori_ condition of all appearance in general, and indeed the immediate condition of inner appearances (of our souls), {{ 51 }} and thereby mediately also of outer appearances. If I can say _a priori_: all outer appearances are in space and determined _a priori_ according to the relations of space, I can say quite generally from the principle of inner sense: all appearances in general, i.e., all objects of the senses, are in time, and stand necessarily in relations of time.

If we abstract from our way of intuiting ourselves internally and, by means of this intuition, also of comprehending all outer intuitions in our power of representation, and consequently take objects as they may be in themselves, then time is nothing. It is only of objective validity in respect of appearances, because these are already things which we take as ***objects of our senses***; but it is no longer objective if one abstracts from the sensibility of our intuition, and thus from that mode of representation which is peculiar to us, and speaks of ***things in general***. Time is therefore merely a subjective condition of our (human) intuition {{{ 61 }}} (which is always sensible, i.e., insofar as we are affected by objects), and in itself, outside the subject, nothing. Nonetheless, in respect of all appearances, and thus also of all things that can encounter us in experience, it is necessarily objective. We cannot say: all things are in time, because in the concept of {{ 52 }} things in general all mode of their intuition is abstracted from, but this intuition is the proper condition under which time belongs to the representation of objects. If the condition is now added to the concept, and it says: all things as appearances (objects of sensible intuition) are in time, then the principle has its sound objective correctness and _a priori_ universality.

Our assertions therefore teach the ***empirical reality*** of time, i.e., objective validity in respect of all objects that may ever be given to our senses. And since our intuition is always sensible, no object can ever be given to us in experience that does not belong under the condition of time. On the contrary, we dispute all claim of time to absolute reality, namely, that it would attach to things absolutely as a condition or property even without any regard to the form of our sensible intuition. Such properties as belong to things in themselves can also never be given to us through the senses. In this, therefore, consists the ***transcendental ideality*** of time, according to which, if one abstracts from the subjective conditions of sensible intuition, it is nothing at all, and can be counted neither as subsisting nor as adhering to the objects in themselves (without their relation to our intuition) {{ 53 }}. Yet this ideality, just like that of space, is as little to be compared with the subreptions of sensations, because in that case one nevertheless presupposes of the appearance itself, to which these predicates adhere, that it has objective reality, which here completely falls away except insofar as it is merely empirical, i.e., views the object itself merely as appearance: concerning which the above remark of the first section is to be consulted.

## § 7. Elucidation.

Against this theory, which grants empirical reality to time but disputes absolute and transcendental reality, I have heard from insightful {{{ 62 }}} men an objection so unanimously raised that I conclude it must naturally present itself to every reader who is unaccustomed to these considerations. It runs as follows: alterations are actual (this is proved by the change of our own representations, even if one wished to deny all outer appearances together with their alterations). Now alterations are possible only in time, consequently time is something actual. The answer is not difficult. I admit the entire argument. Time is indeed something actual, namely, the actual form of inner intuition. It therefore has subjective reality in respect of inner experience, i.e., I actually have the representation of {{ 54 }} time and of my determinations in it. It is therefore actually to be regarded not as object, but as the mode of representation of myself as object. But if I myself or another being could intuit me without this condition of sensibility, then the very same determinations which we now represent to ourselves as alterations would yield a cognition in which the representation of time, and consequently of alteration, would not occur at all. Its empirical reality therefore remains as a condition of all our experiences. Only absolute reality cannot be granted to it in accordance with what has been adduced above. It is nothing other than the form of our inner intuition.[^*] If one takes away from it the special condition of our sensibility, then the concept of time also vanishes, and it does not adhere to the objects themselves, but merely to the subject that intuits them.

The cause, however, why this objection is so unanimously made, and indeed by those who nevertheless know of nothing plausible to object against the doctrine of the ideality {{ 55 }} of space, is this. They did not hope to be able to demonstrate the absolute reality of space apodictically because they are confronted by idealism, according to which the actuality of outer objects is capable of no strict proof; by contrast, the reality of the object of our inner sense (of myself and my state) is immediately clear through consciousness. The former could be a mere illusion, but the latter, in their opinion, is undeniably something actual. But they did not consider that both, without their reality {{{ 63 }}} as representations being disputed, nevertheless belong only to appearance, which always has two sides: the one, where the object is considered in itself (without regard to the way in which it is to be intuited, the constitution of which therefore always remains problematic); the other, where the form of intuition of this object is looked to, which must be sought not in the object in itself, but in the subject to which it appears, and yet nevertheless belongs actually and necessarily to the appearance of this object.

Time and space are accordingly two sources of cognition, from which different synthetic cognitions can be drawn _a priori_, as is brilliantly exemplified especially by pure mathematics in respect of the cognitions of {{ 56 }} space and its relations. They are, namely, both taken together, pure forms of all sensible intuition, and thereby make synthetic propositions _a priori_ possible. But these _a priori_ sources of cognition determine their own boundaries precisely by this (that they are merely conditions of sensibility), namely, that they apply to objects only insofar as they are considered as appearances, but do not represent things in themselves. Those appearances alone are the field of their validity, beyond which no further objective use of them takes place. Moreover, this reality of space and time leaves the security of empirical cognition untouched; for we are just as certain of it whether these forms necessarily adhere to things in themselves or only to our intuition of these things. By contrast, those who assert the absolute reality of space and time, whether they take them to be subsisting or only adhering, must fall into disagreement with the principles of experience itself. For if they decide on the former (which is commonly the party of the mathematical investigators of nature), they must assume two eternal and infinite self-subsisting non-entities (space and time), which are there (without there being anything actual) only in order to comprehend all actuality within themselves. If they take the second party (held by some metaphysical teachers of nature), and space and time are considered by them as relations of appearances (next to or successive to one another) abstracted from experience, {{ 57 }} though confusedly represented in this abstraction, then they must dispute the validity, or at least the apodictic certainty, of mathematical doctrines _a priori_ in respect of actual things (e.g., in space), since this does not occur _a posteriori_ at all, and the _a priori_ concepts of {{{ 64 }}} space and time are, on this view, only creatures of the imagination, whose source must actually be sought in experience, out of whose abstracted relations imagination has made something that indeed contains the general character of these relations but cannot occur without the restrictions that nature has connected with them. The former win this much, that they clear the field of appearances for mathematical assertions. On the other hand, they confuse themselves very much through these very conditions when the understanding wishes to go beyond this field. The second party, to be sure, wins in respect of the latter, namely, that the representations of space and time do not stand in their way when they wish to judge of objects not as appearances but merely in relation to the understanding; but they can neither give any ground for the possibility of mathematical cognitions _a priori_ (since they lack a true and objectively valid intuition _a priori_), nor can they bring the propositions of experience into necessary agreement with those assertions {{ 58 }}. In our theory of the true constitution of these two original forms of sensibility, both difficulties are remedied.

That, finally, the transcendental aesthetic can contain no more than these two elements, namely, space and time, is clear from this: that all other concepts belonging to sensibility, even that of motion, which unites both parts, presuppose something empirical. For this presupposes the perception of something movable. In space, considered in itself, however, there is nothing movable; therefore, the movable must be something that is found ***in space only through experience***, and is thus an empirical datum. Likewise, the transcendental aesthetic cannot count the concept of alteration among its _a priori_ data; for time itself does not alter, but rather something that is in time. Consequently, there is required for this the perception of some existence and the succession of its determinations, hence experience.

[^*]: I can indeed say: my representations succeed one another; but that only means that we are conscious of them as in a temporal sequence, i.e., according to the form of inner sense. Time is therefore not something in itself, nor is it any determination objectively adhering to things.
