---
position: 22
label: "II. Of Transcendental Logic"
depth: 4
aa_page: 77
---

## II. Of Transcendental Logic

General logic abstracts, as we have shown, from all content of cognition, i.e., from all relation of it to the object, and considers only the logical form in the relation of cognitions to one another, i.e., the form of thinking in general. But since there are both pure and empirical intuitions (as the transcendental aesthetic demonstrates), a distinction might well also be found between pure and empirical {{ 80 }} thinking of objects. In this case there would be a logic in which one did not abstract from all content of cognition; for that logic which contained merely the rules of the pure thinking of an object would exclude all those cognitions that were of empirical content. It would also concern itself with the origin of our cognitions of objects, insofar as it cannot be attributed to the objects; whereas general logic has nothing to do with this origin of cognition, but rather considers representations, whether they be originally _a priori_ in ourselves {{{ 78 }}} or given only empirically, merely according to the laws in accordance with which the understanding uses them in relation to one another when it thinks, and thus treats only of the understanding-form that can be given to representations, from whatever source they may have arisen.

And here I make a remark which extends its influence over all subsequent considerations, and which must be kept well in view, namely: that not every _a priori_ cognition, but only that whereby we cognize that and how certain representations (intuitions or concepts) are applied or are possible solely _a priori_, must be called transcendental (i.e., the possibility of cognition or the use {{ 81 }} of it _a priori_). Hence neither space nor any geometrical determination of it _a priori_ is a transcendental representation, but only the cognition that these representations are not of empirical origin at all, and the possibility of how they can nevertheless relate _a priori_ to objects of experience, can be called transcendental. In the same way, the use of space regarding objects in general would also be transcendental; but if it is restricted solely to objects of the senses, it is called empirical. The distinction between the transcendental and the empirical belongs therefore only to the critique of cognitions and does not concern their relation to their object.

In the expectation, therefore, that there may perhaps be concepts that can relate _a priori_ to objects, not as pure or sensible intuitions, but solely as acts of pure thinking, which are consequently concepts but of neither empirical nor aesthetic origin, we form beforehand the idea of a science of pure understanding and of rational cognition, whereby we think objects entirely _a priori_. Such science, which would determine the origin, the domain, and the objective validity of such cognitions, would have to be called ***transcendental logic***, because it has to do merely with the laws of the understanding and of reason, but solely insofar as {{ 82 }} it is related to objects _a priori_ and not, like general logic, to empirical as well as pure rational cognitions without distinction.
