---
position: 24
label: "IV. On the Division of Transcendental Logic into Transcendental Analytic and Dialectic"
depth: 4
aa_page: 81
---

## {{ 87 }} IV. On the Division of Transcendental Logic into Transcendental Analytic and Dialectic

Within a transcendental logic we set the understanding apart (just as, above, sensibility was set apart in the transcendental aesthetic), and we extract from our cognition merely that portion of thinking whose origin lies solely in the understanding. Yet the use of this pure cognition rests, as its condition, upon this: that objects be given to us {{{ 82 }}} in intuition, to which the former may be applied. For in the absence of intuition all our cognition lacks objects, and then remains wholly empty. That part of transcendental logic, then, which presents the elements of pure understanding-cognition together with the principles without which no object at all can be thought, constitutes the transcendental analytic, and is likewise a logic of truth. For no cognition can conflict with it without at the same time surrendering all its content, that is, all relation to any object whatsoever, and thus all truth. But because it is exceedingly alluring and seductive to make use of these pure cognitions and principles of the understanding on their own, and even beyond the bounds of experience—which alone, after all, can put into our hands the matter {{ 88 }} (objects) on which those pure concepts of the understanding might be brought to bear: the understanding thereby runs the risk of putting the merely formal principles of pure understanding to a material use by means of empty ratiocinations, and of judging without distinction about objects that are nonetheless not given to us, indeed that perhaps can in no way be given at all. Since it ought properly to be nothing more than a canon for appraising the empirical use, it is abused when one permits it to serve as an organon for a universal and unrestricted use, and when, with the pure understanding alone, one ventures to judge, assert, and decide synthetically about objects in general. The use of the pure understanding would in that case be dialectical. The second part of transcendental logic must accordingly consist in a critique of this dialectical illusion; it bears the name transcendental dialectic—not as an art of arousing such illusion dogmatically (an art unfortunately much in vogue among the manifold conjuring tricks of metaphysics), but as a critique of the understanding and of reason in respect of their hyperphysical use, so as to uncover the false illusion of their baseless pretensions and to bring their claims to discovery and extension—which they fancy themselves able to attain merely through transcendental principles—down to the mere appraisal and safeguarding of the pure understanding against sophistical delusion.
