---
position: 24
label: "IV. Of the Division of Transcendental Logic into Transcendental Analytic and Dialectic"
depth: 4
aa_page: 81
---

## {{ 87 }} IV. Of the Division of Transcendental Logic into Transcendental Analytic and Dialectic

In a transcendental logic we isolate the understanding (just as above in the transcendental aesthetic we isolated sensibility) and extract from our cognition merely the part of thought that has its origin solely in the understanding. The use of this pure cognition, however, rests upon this as its condition: that objects {{{ 82 }}} are given to us in intuition, to which it can be applied. For without intuition all our cognition lacks objects, and it then remains completely empty. The part of transcendental logic, therefore, that presents the elements of the pure cognition of the understanding, and the principles without which no object can be thought at all, is the transcendental analytic, and at the same time a logic of truth. For no cognition can contradict it without at the same time losing all content, i.e., all relation to any object, and consequently all truth. But because it is very enticing and tempting to make use of these pure cognitions and principles of the understanding alone, and even beyond the boundaries of experience, which nevertheless solely and alone can provide us with the matter {{ 88 }} (objects) to which those pure concepts of the understanding can be applied: the understanding runs the risk of making a material use of the merely formal principles of the pure understanding through empty sophistries, and of judging indiscriminately about objects that are not given to us, indeed perhaps cannot be given in any way whatsoever. Since it should therefore properly be only a canon for the assessment of empirical use, it is misused if one allows it to pass for the organon of a general and unrestricted use, and ventures with the pure understanding alone to judge, to assert, and to decide synthetically about objects in general. Thus the use of the pure understanding would then be dialectical. The second part of transcendental logic must therefore be a critique of this dialectical illusion, and is called transcendental dialectic, not as an art of dogmatically arousing such illusion (an unfortunately very current art of manifold metaphysical juggleries), but as a critique of the understanding and of reason in respect of their hyperphysical use, in order to uncover the false illusion of their groundless pretensions and to reduce their claims to discovery and expansion, which they presume to achieve merely through transcendental principles, to the mere assessment and preservation of the pure understanding against sophistical deception.
