---
position: 28
label: "Section 1. Of the logical use of the understanding in general"
depth: 6
aa_page: 85
---

## Section 1. Of the logical use of the understanding in general

The understanding was explained above merely negatively: through a non-sensible faculty of cognition. Now, independently of sensibility, we cannot partake of any intuition. Therefore, the understanding is not a {{ 93 }} faculty of intuition. But besides intuition there is no other mode of cognition than through concepts. Therefore, the cognition of every, or at least of the human, understanding is a cognition through concepts, not intuitive, but discursive. All intuitions, as sensible, rest on affections, concepts therefore on functions. By function, however, I understand the unity of the act of ordering various representations under a common one. Concepts are therefore grounded on the spontaneity of thought, just as sensible intuitions are grounded on the receptivity of impressions. Now the understanding can make no other use of these concepts than to judge by means of them. Since no representation refers immediately to the object except intuition alone, a concept is never referred immediately to an object, but rather to some other representation of it (whether that be an intuition or already a concept). Judgment is therefore the mediate cognition of an object, hence the representation of a representation of it. In every judgment there is a concept that is valid for many, and among this many also comprehends a given representation, which latter is then referred immediately to the object. Thus, for example, in the judgment: all ***bodies are divisible***, the concept of the divisible {{{ 86 }}} refers to various other concepts; but among these it is here referred specifically to the concept of body, and this in turn to certain {{ 94 }} appearances that present themselves to us. Thus these objects are mediately represented through the concept of divisibility. All judgments are accordingly functions of unity among our representations, since, namely, instead of an immediate representation, a higher one, which comprehends this and several others under itself, is used for the cognition of the object, and many possible cognitions are thereby drawn together into one. We can, however, reduce all acts of the understanding to judgments, so that the ***understanding*** in general can be represented as a ***faculty of judging***. For according to the above it is a faculty of thinking. Thinking is cognition through concepts. Concepts, however, as predicates of possible judgments, refer to some representation of a still undetermined object. Thus the concept of body signifies something, e.g., metal, which can be cognized through that concept. It is therefore a concept only in that it contains other representations under it, by means of which it can refer to objects. It is therefore the predicate for a possible judgment, e.g., every metal is a body. The functions of the understanding can therefore be found in their entirety, if one can completely exhibit the functions of unity in judgments. That this, however, can quite well be accomplished, the following section will demonstrate.
