---
position: 37
label: "Chapter 1. Of the schematism of the pure concepts of the understanding"
depth: 5
aa_page: 133
---

## {{ 176 }} Chapter 1. Of the Schematism of the Pure Concepts of the Understanding

In all subsumptions of an object under a concept, the representation of the former must be ***homogeneous*** with the latter, i.e., the {{{ 134 }}} concept must contain that which is represented in the object to be subsumed under it; for that is just what is meant by the expression: an object is contained under a concept. Thus the empirical concept of a ***plate*** has homogeneity with the pure geometrical concept of a ***circle***, in that the roundness which is thought in the former can be intuited in the latter.

But pure concepts of the understanding, in comparison with empirical (indeed, in general, sensible) intuitions, are entirely heterogeneous, and can never be encountered in any intuition. How then is the ***subsumption*** of the latter under the former, and thus the ***application*** of the category to appearances, possible, since no one {{ 177 }} will say that this, e.g., causality, can also be intuited through the senses and is contained in the appearance? This so natural and important question is now precisely the cause which makes a transcendental doctrine of the power of judgment necessary, in order, namely, to show the possibility of how ***pure concepts of the understanding*** can be applied to appearances at all. In all other sciences, where the concepts through which the object is thought in general are not so distinct and heterogeneous from those that represent it _in concreto_ as it is given, it is unnecessary to provide a special discussion regarding the application of the former to the latter.

Now it is clear that there must be a third thing, which must stand in homogeneity with the category on the one hand, and with the appearance on the other, and which makes the application of the former to the latter possible. This mediating representation must be pure (without anything empirical) and yet, on the one hand, ***intellectual***, and on the other, ***sensible***. Such a one is the ***transcendental schema***.

The concept of the understanding contains pure synthetic unity of the manifold in general. Time, as the formal condition of the manifold of inner sense, and thus of the connection of all representations, contains a manifold _a priori_ in pure intuition. Now a transcendental determination of time is homogeneous with the ***category*** (which constitutes its unity) insofar as it is ***universal*** and rests on a {{ 178 }} rule _a priori_. On the other hand, it is homogeneous with the ***appearance*** insofar as ***time*** is contained in every empirical representation of the manifold. Hence an application of the category to appearances will be possible by means of the transcendental {{{ 135 }}} determination of time, which, as the schema of the concepts of the understanding, mediates the subsumption of the latter under the former.

After what has been shown in the deduction of the categories, no one, it is to be hoped, will stand in doubt to decide on the question: whether these pure concepts of the understanding are of merely empirical or also of transcendental use, i.e., whether they relate _a priori_ solely to appearances as conditions of a possible experience, or whether they can be extended, as conditions of the possibility of things in general, to objects in themselves (without any restriction to our sensibility). For we have there seen: that concepts are entirely impossible, and cannot have any meaning, where an object is not given either to them themselves or at least to the elements of which they consist, and thus they cannot apply at all to things in themselves (without regard to whether and how they may be given to us); that, furthermore, the only way in which objects are given to us is the modification of our sensibility; finally, that pure concepts _a priori_ {{ 179 }} must, besides the function of the understanding in the category, also contain formal conditions of sensibility (namely, of inner sense) _a priori_, which contain the general condition under which alone the category can be applied to any object. We will call this formal and pure condition of sensibility, to which the concept of the understanding is restricted in its use, the ***schema*** of this concept of the understanding, and the procedure of the understanding with these schemata the ***schematism*** of pure understanding.

The schema is in itself always merely a product of the imagination; but since the synthesis of the latter has as its aim no single intuition, but rather the unity in the determination of sensibility alone, the schema is nevertheless to be distinguished from the image. Thus, if I see five points one after another: ....., this is an image of the number five. On the contrary, if I only think of a number in general, which can be five or a hundred, this thinking is more the representation of a method for representing a multitude (e.g., a thousand) in an image in accordance with a certain concept, than this image itself, which in the latter case I could hardly survey and compare with the concept. This representation of a general procedure of the imagination for providing a {{ 180 }} concept with its image, I call the schema for this concept.

{{{ 136 }}} In fact, not images of objects but schemata lie at the basis of our pure sensible concepts. To the concept of a triangle in general, no image of it would ever be adequate. For it would not reach the universality of the concept, which makes it valid for all triangles, whether right-angled or oblique-angled, etc., but would always be restricted to only a part of this sphere. The schema of the triangle can never exist anywhere other than in thoughts, and it signifies a rule of the synthesis of the imagination with respect to pure shapes in space. Still less does an object of experience or an image of it ever reach the empirical concept, but the latter relates itself at all times directly to the schema of the imagination, as a rule of the determination of our intuition in accordance with a certain general concept. The concept of a dog signifies a rule according to which my imagination can delineate the figure of a four-footed animal in general, without being restricted to any single particular shape that experience presents to me, or even to any possible image that I can represent _in concreto_. This schematism of our understanding with respect to appearances and their mere form is a hidden art in the depths of the {{ 181 }} human soul, the true operations of which we can hardly ever divine from nature and lay open before our eyes. We can only say this much: the ***image*** is a product of the empirical faculty of the productive imagination, while the ***schema*** of sensible concepts (such as figures in space) is a product and, as it were, a monogram of pure _a priori_ imagination, through which and in accordance with which images first become possible, which, however, must always be connected with the concept only by means of the schema that they designate, and in themselves do not fully coincide with it. On the contrary, the schema of a pure concept of the understanding is something that can never be brought into any image, but is rather only the pure synthesis in accordance with a rule of unity according to concepts in general, which the category expresses; and it is a transcendental product of the imagination, which concerns the determination of inner sense in general in accordance with conditions of its form (time) in respect of all representations, insofar as these are to connect _a priori_ in one concept in accordance with the unity of apperception.

Without dwelling on a dry and tedious analysis of what is required for transcendental schemata of pure concepts of the understanding {{{ 137 }}} in general, we would rather present them according to the order of the categories and in connection with them.

{{ 182 }} The pure image of all magnitudes (_quantorum_) for the outer sense is space; but that of all objects of the senses in general is time. But the pure ***schema of magnitude*** (_quantitatis_), as a concept of the understanding, is the ***number***, which is a representation that comprises the successive addition of one to one (homogeneous). Thus number is nothing other than the unity of the synthesis of the manifold of a homogeneous intuition in general, in that I generate time itself in the apprehension of the intuition.

In the pure concept of the understanding, reality is that which corresponds to a sensation in general, that is, that whose concept in itself indicates a being (in time); negation is that whose concept represents a non-being (in time). The opposition of both therefore occurs in the difference of the same time, as a filled or an empty time. Since time is only the form of intuition, and thus of objects as appearances, that which in these corresponds to sensation is the transcendental matter of all objects as things in themselves (thinghood, reality). Now every sensation has a degree or magnitude, whereby it can more or less fill the same time, i.e., inner sense, in respect of the same representation of an object, until it ceases in nothingness (= 0 = _negatio_). Hence there is a relation and connection, or {{ 183 }} rather a transition from reality to negation, which makes every reality representable as a _quantum_; and the schema of a reality, as the quantity of something insofar as it fills time, is precisely this continuous and uniform generation of the same in time, as one descends in time from a sensation that has a certain degree to its disappearance, or gradually ascends from negation to its magnitude.

The schema of substance is the permanence of the real in time, i.e., the representation of it as a substratum of empirical time-determination in general, which therefore remains while everything else changes. (Time does not elapse, but rather the existence of the alterable elapses in it. To time, therefore, which is itself immutable and permanent, there corresponds in appearance the immutable in existence, i.e., substance, and only by reference to it can the succession and coexistence of appearances be determined in respect of time.)

{{{ 138 }}} The schema of cause and of the causality of a thing in general is the real upon which, whenever it is posited at will, something else always follows. It consists therefore in the succession of the manifold, insofar as it is subject to a rule.

The schema of community (reciprocity), or of the reciprocal causality of substances with respect to their accidents, is the {{ 184 }} coexistence of the determinations of the one with those of the other, in accordance with a general rule.

The schema of possibility is the agreement of the synthesis of different representations with the conditions of time in general (e.g., since what is opposite in a thing cannot exist at the same time, but only one after another), and thus the determination of the representation of a thing at some time.

The schema of actuality is existence in a determinate time.

The schema of necessity is the existence of an object at all times.

One now sees from all this that the schema of each category contains and represents: that of magnitude, the generation (synthesis) of time itself in the successive apprehension of an object; that of quality, the synthesis of sensation (perception) with the representation of time, or the filling of time; that of relation, the relation of perceptions to one another at all times (i.e., in accordance with a rule of time-determination); and finally, that of modality and its categories, time itself as the correlatum of the determination of an object, as to whether and how it belongs to time. The schemata are therefore nothing but ***time-determinations*** _a priori_ in accordance with rules, and these relate, according to the order of the categories, to the ***time-series***, {{ 185 }} the ***time-content***, the ***time-order***, and finally the ***sum total of time*** in respect of all possible objects.

From this it is now clear that the schematism of the understanding through the transcendental synthesis of the imagination amounts to nothing other than the unity of all the manifold of intuition in inner sense, and thus indirectly to the unity of apperception as a function which corresponds to inner sense (a receptivity). Thus the schemata of pure concepts of the understanding are the true and sole conditions for providing them with a relation to objects, and thus ***meaning***, and the categories are therefore in the end of {{{ 139 }}} no other than a possible empirical use, in that they serve merely, through grounds of an _a priori_ necessary unity (on account of the necessary unification of all consciousness in an original apperception), to subject appearances to general rules of synthesis, and thereby to make them fit for thoroughgoing connection in an experience.

But all our cognitions lie in the whole of all possible experience, and in the general relation to this experience consists transcendental truth, which precedes all empirical truth and makes it possible.

But it is also obvious: that, although the schemata {{ 186 }} of sensibility first realize the categories, they nevertheless also restrict them, i.e., limit them to conditions that lie outside the understanding (namely, in sensibility). Hence the schema is actually only the phenomenon, or the sensible concept of an object, in agreement with the category (_**numerus**_ _est quantitas phaenomenon_, _**sensatio**_ _realitas phaenomenon_, _**constans**_ _et perdurabile rerum substantia phaenomenon_ — _**aeternitas**_, _necessitas phaenomenon etc._). If we now leave out a restricting condition, we amplify, as it seems, the previously restricted concept; thus the categories in their pure meaning, without all conditions of sensibility, should hold of things in general, ***as they are***, instead of their schemata merely representing them ***as they appear***, the former therefore having a meaning independent of all schemata and extended much further. In fact, even after the separation of all sensible conditions, there remains to the pure concepts of the understanding a meaning, but only a logical one of the mere unity of representations, to which, however, no object, and thus also no meaning, is given that could yield a concept of the object. Thus, for example, if one left out the sensible determination of permanence, substance would signify nothing more than a something that can be thought as a subject (without being a predicate of something else). From this representation I can make nothing, since it does not show me at all {{ 187 }} what determinations that thing has which is to hold as such a first subject. Thus, without schemata, the categories are only functions of the understanding for concepts, but do not represent any object. This meaning comes to them from sensibility, which realizes the understanding while at the same time restricting it.
