---
position: 39
label: "Section 1. Of the highest principle of all analytic judgments"
depth: 6
aa_page: 141
---

## Section 1. Of the highest principle of all analytic judgments

Of whatever content our cognition may be, and however it may relate to the object, yet the universal, though to be sure only negative, condition of all our judgments in general is that they do not contradict themselves, otherwise these judgments are in themselves (even without regard to the object) nothing {{ 190 }}. But even if there is no contradiction in our judgment, it can nevertheless connect concepts in such a way as the object does not bring with it, or even without any ground being given to us either _a priori_ or _a posteriori_ which would justify such a judgment; and thus a judgment, despite its being free from all inner contradiction, can still be either false or groundless.

The proposition now: No predicate belongs to a thing which contradicts it, is called the principle of contradiction and is a universal, although merely negative, criterion of all truth, but also belongs for this reason merely to logic, because it holds of cognitions merely as cognitions in general, irrespective of their content, and says: that contradiction entirely annihilates and cancels them.

Yet one can also make a positive use of it, i.e., not merely to banish falsehood and error (insofar as it rests on contradiction), but also to cognize truth.

{{{ 142 }}} For ***if the judgment is analytic,*** whether it be negative or affirmative, its truth must always be able to be sufficiently cognized in accordance with the principle of contradiction. For of that which already lies and is thought as a concept in the cognition of the object, the contrary is always correctly denied, but the concept itself must necessarily be affirmed of it {{ 191 }}, because the opposite of it would contradict the object.

Therefore we must also allow the ***principle of contradiction*** to hold as the universal and fully sufficient ***principium of all analytic cognition***; but its authority and utility go no further than as a sufficient criterion of truth. For that no cognition can be contrary to it without annihilating itself, to be sure, makes this principle a conditio sine qua non, but not the determining ground of the truth of our cognition. Since we actually have to do only with the synthetic part of our cognition, we shall indeed at all times be careful never to act contrary to this inviolable principle, but we can never await any information from it with respect to the truth of this kind of cognition.

There is, however, a formula of this famous principle—although it is stripped of all content and is merely formal—which contains a synthesis that through carelessness and quite unnecessarily was mixed into it. It runs: It is impossible that something should ***at the same time*** be and not be. Apart from the fact that here apodictic certainty is superfluously attached (by means of the word 'impossible'), which must after all be understood of itself from the principle, the proposition is affected by the {{ 192 }} condition of time, and says, as it were: A thing = A, which is something = B, cannot at the same time be non-B; but it can very well be both (B as well as non-B) successively. For example, a man who is young cannot at the same time be old, but the selfsame man can very well be young at one time and not young, i.e., old, at another. Now the principle of contradiction, as a merely logical principle, must not limit its assertions to relations of time at all, and therefore such a formula is completely contrary to its purpose. The misunderstanding arises merely from this: that we first separate a predicate of a thing from its concept, and afterwards connect its opposite with this predicate, which never yields a contradiction with the subject, but only with {{{ 143 }}} its predicate which has been synthetically connected with it, and indeed only when the first and the second predicate are posited at the same time. If I say: a man who is unlearned is not learned, the condition: ***at the same time,*** must stand with it; for he who is unlearned at one time can very well be learned at another. But if I say: no unlearned man is learned, then the proposition is analytic, because the mark (of unlearnedness) now helps to constitute the concept of the subject; and then the negative proposition is immediately evident from the principle of contradiction, without the condition: ***at the same time,*** having to be added. This is then also the reason why I have so {{ 193 }} altered its formula above that the nature of an analytic proposition is thereby clearly expressed.
