---
position: 40
label: "Section 2. Of the highest principle of all synthetic judgments"
depth: 6
aa_page: 143
---

## Section 2. Of the highest principle of all synthetic judgments

The explanation of the possibility of synthetic judgments is a task with which general logic has nothing to do, and of which it indeed must not even know the name. But in a transcendental logic, it is the most important business of all, and even the only one, when the talk is of the possibility of synthetic judgments _a priori_, likewise of the conditions and the extent of their validity. For after the completion of this, it can fully satisfy its purpose, namely, to determine the extent and the limits of the pure understanding.

In an analytic judgment I remain with the given concept, in order to make out something of it. If it is to be affirmative, I attribute to this concept only that which was already thought in it; if it is to be negative, I only exclude its opposite from it. In synthetic judgments, however, I am to go beyond the given concept in order to consider in relation with it something quite different from what was thought in it, which is therefore never a relation {{ 194 }} of identity or of contradiction, and in which neither truth nor error can be discerned in the judgment itself.

{{{ 144 }}} Granted, therefore, that one must go beyond a given concept in order to compare it synthetically with another, a third is necessary, in which alone the synthesis of two concepts can arise. What now, however, is this third, as the medium of all synthetic judgments? It is only a sum total in which all our representations are contained, namely, the inner sense and its form _a priori_, time. The synthesis of representations rests on the imagination, but their synthetic unity (which is required for judgment) rests on the unity of apperception. In this, therefore, the possibility of synthetic judgments and, since all three contain the sources of representations _a priori_, also the possibility of pure synthetic judgments, will have to be sought; indeed, they will even be necessary for these reasons if a cognition of objects is to come about which rests solely on the synthesis of representations.

If a cognition is to have objective reality, i.e., to relate to an object and to have significance and sense in the same, then the object must be capable of being given in some way. {{ 195 }} Without this, the concepts are empty, and although one has indeed thought thereby, in fact one has cognized nothing through this thinking, but has merely played with representations. To give an object—if this is not in turn to be meant only mediately, but to present it immediately in intuition—is nothing other than to relate its representation to experience (be it actual or indeed possible). Even space and time, however pure these concepts are of everything empirical, and however certain it is that they are represented in the mind completely _a priori_, would yet be without objective validity and without sense and significance if their necessary use on the objects of experience were not shown; indeed, their representation is a mere schema that always relates to the reproductive imagination, which summons the objects of experience, without which they would have no significance; and so it is with all concepts without distinction.

The ***possibility of experience*** is therefore that which gives objective reality to all our cognitions _a priori_. Now experience rests on the synthetic unity of appearances, i.e., on a synthesis according to concepts of the object of appearances in general, without which it would not even be cognition, but a rhapsody of perceptions, which would not fit together in any context according to rules of a thoroughly connected {{{ 145 }}} (possible) consciousness, and thus in the transcendental {{ 196 }} and necessary unity of apperception. Experience therefore has principles of its form _a priori_ lying at its ground, namely, universal rules of unity in the synthesis of appearances, whose objective reality as necessary conditions can always be shown in experience, indeed even in its possibility. But apart from this relation, synthetic propositions _a priori_ are entirely impossible, because they have no third, namely, no object, on which the synthetic unity of their concepts could demonstrate objective reality.

Hence, although we cognize so much _a priori_ in synthetic judgments about space in general, or the shapes that the productive imagination sketches in it, so that we really stand in need of no experience for this, yet this cognition would be nothing at all, but a preoccupation with a mere figment of the brain, were space not to be regarded as the condition of the appearances which constitute the matter for outer experience; therefore, those pure synthetic judgments relate, although only mediately, to possible experience, or rather to its possibility itself, and ground the objective validity of their synthesis on that alone.

Since, therefore, experience as an empirical synthesis is, in its possibility, the only mode of cognition that gives reality to all other synthesis, this, as cognition _a priori_, also has truth (agreement {{ 197 }} with the object) only by this: that it contains nothing further than what is necessary for the synthetic unity of experience in general.

The supreme principle of all synthetic judgments is therefore: every object stands under the necessary conditions of the synthetic unity of the manifold of intuition in a possible experience.

In such a way are synthetic judgments _a priori_ possible, if we relate the formal conditions of intuition _a priori_, the synthesis of the imagination, and its necessary unity in a transcendental apperception, to a possible cognition of experience in general, and say: the conditions of the ***possibility of experience*** in general are at the same time conditions of the ***possibility of the objects of experience***, and therefore have objective validity in a synthetic judgment _a priori_.
