---
position: 43
label: "2. Anticipations of Perception"
depth: 7
aa_page: 151
---

## 2. Anticipations of Perception

**Its principle is:** ***In all appearances, the real, which is an object of sensation, has intensive magnitude***, **i.e., a degree.**

## {{{ 152 }}} Proof.

Perception is empirical consciousness, i.e., one in which there is at the same time sensation. Appearances, as objects of perception, are not pure (merely formal) intuitions, like space and time (for these cannot be perceived in themselves at all). They therefore contain in themselves, over and above the intuition, the materials for some object in general (whereby something existing in space or time is represented), i.e., the real of sensation as a merely subjective representation, of which one can only be conscious that the subject is affected, and {{ 208 }} which one relates to an object in general. Now, from empirical consciousness to pure consciousness a gradual alteration is possible, wherein the real of the former entirely disappears, and a merely formal (_a priori_) consciousness of the manifold in space and time remains: consequently, a synthesis of the generation of the magnitude of a sensation is also possible, from its beginning, namely pure intuition = 0, up to any arbitrary magnitude of the same. Since, then, sensation in itself is not an objective representation at all, and in it neither the intuition of space nor that of time is to be found, there will indeed belong to it no extensive magnitude, but still a magnitude (and indeed through the apprehension of the same, in which empirical consciousness can grow in a certain time from nothing = 0 up to its given measure), thus an ***intensive magnitude***, corresponding to which an ***intensive magnitude***, i.e., a degree of influence on the sense, must be attributed to all objects of perception, insofar as the latter contains sensation.

One can call all cognition, whereby I can cognize and determine _a priori_ that which belongs to empirical cognition, an anticipation, and without doubt this is the meaning in which Epicurus used his expression _prolepsis_. Since, however, there is something in appearances that is never cognized _a priori_, and which therefore also constitutes the real distinction of the empirical from cognition _a priori_, {{ 209 }} namely sensation (as the matter of perception), it follows that this is what properly cannot be anticipated at all. {{{ 153 }}} On the other hand, we would be able to call the pure determinations in space and time, both in respect of shape and magnitude, anticipations of appearances, because they represent _a priori_ that which may always be given _a posteriori_ in experience. But suppose that there is nevertheless something which can be cognized _a priori_ in every sensation as sensation in general (without any particular one being given): then this would deserve to be called anticipation in an exceptional sense, because it seems strange to forestall experience in precisely that which concerns its matter, which can only be drawn from experience itself. And such indeed is the case here.

Apprehension by means of sensation alone fills only a single moment (if, that is, I do not take into consideration the succession of many sensations). As something in the appearance, the apprehension of which is not a successive synthesis that proceeds from parts to the whole representation, it therefore has no extensive magnitude: the lack of sensation in this same moment would represent it as empty, consequently = 0. Now, what in empirical intuition corresponds to sensation is reality (_realitas phaenomenon_), while what corresponds to the lack of it is {{ 210 }} negation = 0. But every sensation is capable of diminution, so that it can decrease and thus gradually disappear. Therefore, between reality in appearance and negation, there is a continuous connection of many possible intermediate sensations, the difference between which is always smaller than the difference between the given sensation and zero or complete negation. That is: the real in appearance has at all times a magnitude, which however is not encountered in apprehension, since this occurs by means of mere sensation in a single moment and not through a successive synthesis of many sensations, and thus does not proceed from the parts to the whole; it therefore has, to be sure, a magnitude, but not an extensive one.

Now I call that magnitude which is apprehended only as unity, and in which multiplicity can be represented only through approximation to negation = 0, ***intensive magnitude***. Thus every reality in appearance has intensive magnitude, i.e., a degree. If one considers this reality as cause (whether of sensation or of another reality in appearance, e.g., an alteration): then one calls the degree of reality as cause a moment, e.g., the moment of gravity, and indeed for this reason, because the degree designates only that magnitude whose apprehension {{{ 154 }}} is not successive, but instantaneous. But I touch upon this here only in passing, for I do not as yet have to do with causality.

{{ 211 }} Accordingly, every sensation, and consequently also every reality in appearance, however small it may be, has a degree, i.e., an intensive magnitude, which can still always be diminished, and between reality and negation there is a continuous connection of possible realities and possible smaller perceptions. Every color, e.g. red, has a degree which, however small it may be, is never the smallest, and the same is the case everywhere with warmth, the moment of gravity, etc.

The property of magnitudes, according to which no part of them is the smallest possible (no part is simple), is called their continuity. Space and time are _quanta continua_, because no part of them can be given without enclosing it between boundaries (points and moments), and thus only in such a way that this part is itself in turn a space or a time. Space therefore consists only of spaces, time only of times. Points and moments are only boundaries, i.e., mere places of their limitation; but places always presuppose those intuitions which they are to limit or determine, and neither space nor time can be composed out of mere places as out of constituents that could be given before space or time. Magnitudes of this kind can also be called ***flowing***, because the synthesis (of the productive imagination) in their generation is a progression in time, the continuity of which {{ 212 }} one is accustomed to designate particularly by the expression of flowing (passing away).

All appearances in general are therefore continuous magnitudes, whether according to their intuition as extensive, or according to mere perception (sensation and consequently reality) as intensive magnitudes. If the synthesis of the manifold of appearance is interrupted, then this is an aggregate of many appearances (and not properly appearance as a quantum), which is generated not by the mere continuation of the productive synthesis of a certain kind, but by the repetition of an ever-ceasing synthesis. If I call 13 talers a quantum of money, I name it correctly insofar as I understand by it the content of a mark of fine silver, which is indeed a continuous magnitude in which no part is the smallest {{{ 155 }}}, but rather every part could constitute a coin that would always contain matter for even smaller ones. If, however, by that name I understand 13 round talers, as so many coins (whatever their silver content may be), I name it inappropriately as a quantum of talers, but must call it an aggregate, i.e., a number of coins. Since, however, with every number a unity must lie at the basis, appearance as unity is a quantum, and as such is at all times a continuum.

If, then, all appearances, considered both extensively and intensively, {{ 213 }} are continuous magnitudes: then the proposition that all alteration (transition of a thing from one state into another) is also continuous would be easily proved here with mathematical evidence, were it not that the causality of an alteration in general lies entirely outside the boundaries of a transcendental philosophy and presupposes empirical principles. For that a cause is possible which alters the state of things, i.e., determines them to the contrary of a certain given state, of this the understanding gives us _a priori_ no disclosure at all, not merely because it does not comprehend the possibility of it at all (for this insight is lacking to us in several _a priori_ cognitions), but because alterability affects only certain determinations of appearances which experience alone can teach, while their cause is to be found in the unalterable. Since, however, we have nothing before us here of which we can make use except the pure basic concepts of all possible experience, among which there must be absolutely nothing empirical: we cannot, without violating the unity of the system, anticipate general natural science, which is built upon certain basic experiences.

Nevertheless, we do not lack proofs of the great influence that this principle of ours has in anticipating perceptions, and even in supplying their lack to such an extent that it bars the door to all false conclusions that might be drawn therefrom.

{{ 214 }} If all reality in perception has a degree, between which and negation there is an infinite sequence of ever smaller degrees, and if nevertheless every sense must have a definite degree of receptivity for sensations: then no perception, and consequently no experience, is possible that would prove a complete absence of all that is real in appearance, whether directly or indirectly (by whatever {{{ 156 }}} detour in inference one may choose), i.e., a proof of empty space or empty time can never be drawn from experience. For in the first place, the complete lack of the real in sensory intuition cannot itself be perceived; in the second place, it cannot be inferred from any single appearance and the difference in the degree of its reality, nor may it ever be assumed for the explanation of the same. For even if the entire intuition of a certain space or time is thoroughly real, i.e., no part of it is empty, yet, since every reality has its degree, which (while the extensive magnitude of the appearance remains unchanged) can diminish through infinite steps down to nothing (the empty), there must be infinitely different degrees with which space or time may be filled, and the intensive magnitude in different appearances can be smaller or larger, although the extensive magnitude of the intuition is the same.

{{ 215 }} We will give an example of this. Almost all physicists, since they perceive a great difference in the quantity of matter of various kinds under the same volume (partly through the moment of gravity or weight, partly through the moment of resistance against other moved matter), conclude from this unanimously: that this volume (extensive magnitude of the appearance) must in all matter, although in different measure, be empty. But who among these, for the most part mathematical and mechanical natural scientists, would ever have imagined that they based this conclusion of theirs merely upon a metaphysical presupposition, which they nevertheless pretend so much to avoid, by assuming that the ***real*** in space (I will not call it here impenetrability or weight, because these are empirical concepts) is ***everywhere one and the same*** and can distinguish itself only according to its extensive magnitude, i.e., its quantity. To this presupposition, for which they could have no ground in experience, and which is therefore merely metaphysical, I oppose a transcendental proof, which indeed is not intended to explain the difference in the filling of spaces, but yet completely annuls the supposed necessity of that presupposition that the said difference cannot be explained otherwise than by assuming empty spaces, and which has the merit of at least setting the understanding at {{ 216 }} liberty to think this difference in another way also, if the explanation of nature should make any hypothesis necessary for this purpose. For there we see that, although equal spaces may be completely filled by different matters {{{ 157 }}}, so that in none of them is there a point in which their presence is not to be encountered, yet every real has, for the same quality, its degree (of resistance or of weight), which, without diminution of the extensive magnitude or quantity, can be infinitely smaller before it passes over into the empty and disappears. Thus an expansion that fills a space, e.g., heat, and in the same way every other reality (in appearance), can, without in the least leaving the smallest part of this space empty, decrease in its degrees infinitely, and nonetheless fill the space with these smaller degrees just as well as another appearance does with larger ones. My intention here is by no means to assert that this is really the case with the difference of matters in respect of their specific gravity, but only to demonstrate from a principle of the pure understanding: that the nature of our perceptions makes such a mode of explanation possible, and that one falsely assumes the real of appearance to be equal in degree and different only in aggregation and its extensive magnitude, and even asserts this, allegedly, through an _a priori_ principle of the understanding.

{{ 217 }} Nevertheless, this anticipation of perception has always something striking about it for an investigator who is accustomed to transcendental reflection and has thereby become cautious, and it excites some doubt as to how the understanding can anticipate a synthetic proposition of this kind, such as that concerning the degree of everything real in appearances, and consequently the possibility of the inner difference of sensation itself when one abstracts from its empirical quality; and it is therefore still a question not unworthy of solution: how the understanding can here speak synthetically _a priori_ about appearances and even anticipate them in that which is properly and merely empirical, namely what concerns sensation.

The ***quality*** of sensation is at all times merely empirical and cannot be represented _a priori_ at all (e.g., colors, taste, etc.). But the real, which corresponds to sensations in general, in contrast with negation = 0, represents only something whose concept in itself contains a being, and signifies nothing but the synthesis in an empirical consciousness in general. For in the inner sense, empirical consciousness can be raised from 0 to any greater degree, so that the very same extensive magnitude of intuition (e.g., an illuminated surface) excites as great a {{{ 158 }}} sensation as an aggregate of many other (less illuminated) surfaces combined. One can therefore completely abstract from the extensive magnitude of the appearance {{ 218 }} and yet, in the mere sensation in a single moment, represent to oneself a synthesis of the uniform increase from 0 to the given empirical consciousness. All sensations are therefore indeed given as such only _a posteriori_, but their property of having a degree can be cognized _a priori_. It is remarkable that in magnitudes in general we can cognize _a priori_ only a single ***quality***, namely continuity, but in all quality (the real of appearances) nothing further _a priori_ than its intensive ***quantity***, namely that they have a degree; everything else is left to experience.
