---
position: 44
label: "3. Analogies of Experience"
depth: 7
aa_page: 158
---

## {{{ 158 }}} 3. Analogies of Experience

**The principle of them is:** ***Experience is possible only through the representation of a necessary connection of perceptions.***

## Proof.

Experience is an empirical cognition, i. e., a cognition that determines an object through perceptions. It is therefore a synthesis of perceptions, which is itself not contained in perception, but contains the synthetic unity of the manifold of them in one consciousness, which constitutes the essential element of a cognition of the ***objects*** {{ 219 }} of the senses, i. e., of experience (not merely of the intuition or sensation of the senses). Now, to be sure, in experience perceptions come together only accidentally, so that no necessity of their connection is apparent, nor can be apparent, from the perceptions themselves; because apprehension is only a juxtaposition of the manifold of empirical intuition, but no representation of {{{ 159 }}} the necessity of the connected existence of the appearances, which it juxtaposes in space and time, is met with in it. But since experience is a cognition of objects through perceptions, consequently the relation in the existence of the manifold is to be represented in it, not as it is juxtaposed in time, but as it is objectively in time, while time itself, however, cannot be perceived: the determination of the existence of objects in time can therefore occur only through their connection in time in general, and thus only through concepts that connect them _a priori_. Since these now always carry necessity with them, experience is possible only through a representation of a necessary connection of perceptions.

The three _modi_ of time are ***permanence***, ***succession***, and ***coexistence***. Hence three rules of all temporal relations of appearances, according to which the existence of each can be determined in respect of the unity of all time, will precede all experience and make it possible in the first place.

The general principle of all three analogies rests on the necessary {{ 220 }} ***unity*** of apperception in respect of all possible empirical consciousness (of perception) ***at every time***, consequently, since that lies _a priori_ at the basis, on the synthetic unity of all appearances according to their relation in time. For the original apperception refers to the inner sense (the sum total of all representations) and indeed _a priori_ to its form, i. e., the relation of the manifold empirical consciousness in time. In the original apperception, now, all this manifold is to be united according to its temporal relations; for this is what its transcendental unity _a priori_ says, under which stands everything that is to belong to my (i. e., my single) cognition, and can therefore become an object for me. This ***synthetic unity*** in the temporal relation of all perceptions, ***which is determined _a priori_***, is therefore the law: that all empirical determinations of time must stand under rules of the universal determination of time; and the analogies of experience, of which we now wish to treat, must be such rules.

These principles have this peculiarity about them, that they consider not appearances and the synthesis of their empirical intuition, but merely ***existence*** and their ***relation*** to one another in respect of this their {{ 221 }} existence. Now the way in which something is apprehended in appearance {{{ 160 }}} can be determined _a priori_ in such a manner that the rule of its synthesis can at the same time give this intuition _a priori_ in any given empirical example, i. e., can bring it about therefrom. But the existence of appearances cannot be cognized _a priori_; and though we might indeed be able to arrive in this way at inferring some existence, yet we would not cognize this determinately, i. e., we would not be able to anticipate that by which its empirical intuition is distinguished from others.

The two preceding principles, which I called mathematical, in consideration of the fact that they justified the application of mathematics to appearances, concerned appearances according to their mere possibility, and taught how they could be generated, as regards both their intuition and the real in their perception, according to rules of a mathematical synthesis; hence in both cases numerical magnitudes, and with them the determination of the appearance as magnitude, can be employed. Thus, for example, I shall be able to compose the degree of the sensation of sunlight from about 200,000 illuminations by the moon, and give it determinately _a priori_, i. e., construct it. Hence we can call the former principles constitutive.

It must be quite otherwise with those principles that are to bring the existence of appearances _a priori_ under rules. For since this cannot {{ 222 }} be constructed, they will concern only the relation of existence, and can yield none other than merely ***regulative*** principles. Here, therefore, we cannot think of either axioms or anticipations; rather, if a perception is given to us in a temporal relation to others (although indeterminate ones), it will not be possible to say _a priori_ ***which*** other and ***how great*** a perception it is, but only how it is necessarily connected as regards existence with the former in this _modo_ of time. In philosophy, analogies signify something very different from what they represent in mathematics. In the latter, they are formulas which express the equality of two relations of magnitude, and are always ***constitutive***, so that, if three members of the proportion are given, the fourth is also thereby given, i. e., can be constructed. But in philosophy, analogy is not the equality of two ***quantitative***, but of ***qualitative*** relations, where from three given members I can cognize and give _a priori_ only the ***relation*** to a fourth, but not ***this*** fourth ***member*** itself, although {{{ 161 }}} I do have a rule for seeking it in experience, and a mark for discovering it therein. An analogy of experience will therefore be only a rule according to which unity of experience is to arise from perceptions (not as perception itself, as empirical intuition in general), and as a principle of objects (appearances) it will hold not ***constitutively***, but merely ***regulatively***. The very same {{ 223 }} will also hold of the postulates of empirical thought in general, which concern together the synthesis of mere intuition (of the form of appearance), of perception (of its matter), and of experience (of the relation of these perceptions), namely, that they are only regulative principles and are distinguished from the mathematical ones, which are constitutive, not indeed in their certainty, which is established _a priori_ in both, but yet in the nature of their evidence, i. e., in their intuitive character (and consequently also in their demonstration).

What, however, was recalled in the case of all synthetic principles, and must be especially noted here, is this: that these analogies have their sole significance and validity not as principles of the transcendental, but merely of the empirical use of the understanding, and can therefore also be proven only as such; consequently, the appearances must be subsumed not under the categories absolutely, but only under their schemata. For if the objects to which these principles are to be related were things in themselves, it would be entirely impossible to cognize anything of them synthetically _a priori_. Now, however, they are nothing but appearances, whose complete cognition, in which all principles _a priori_ must in the end always terminate, is merely possible experience; consequently, those principles can have as their goal nothing but the conditions of the unity of empirical cognition in the synthesis of the {{ 224 }} appearances; but this unity is thought solely in the schema of the pure concept of the understanding, of whose unity, as a synthesis in general, the category contains the function restricted by no sensible condition. We shall therefore, by means of these principles, be justified in composing appearances only according to an analogy with the logical and universal unity of concepts, and hence, though in the principle itself we indeed make use of the category, in its execution (its application to appearances) we shall set its schema in its place as the key to its use, or rather set it alongside the category as its restricting condition, under the name of a formula of the former.
