---
position: 46
label: "Second Analogy. Principle of succession in time in accordance with the law of causality"
depth: 8
aa_page: 166
---

## Second Analogy. Principle of succession in time in accordance with the law of causality

***All alterations occur in accordance with the law of the connection of cause and effect.***

## {{{ 167 }}} Proof.

(That all appearances of the temporal succession are collectively only ***alterations***, i.e., a successive being and non-being of the determinations of the substance that persists, and consequently that the being of the substance itself which follows upon its non-being, or its non-being which follows upon its {{ 233 }} existence—in other words, the arising or perishing of the substance itself—does not take place, has been demonstrated by the preceding principle. This principle could also have been expressed as follows: ***All change (succession) of appearances is only alteration***; for the arising or perishing of substance are not alterations of it, because the concept of alteration presupposes one and the same subject as existing with two opposed determinations, and therefore as persisting. After this preliminary remark, the proof follows).

I perceive that appearances follow one another, i.e., that a state of things exists at one time, the opposite of which existed in the previous state. I therefore really connect two perceptions in time. Now connection is not the work of mere sense and intuition, but is here the product of a synthetic faculty of the imagination, which determines the inner sense with respect to the temporal relation. But this faculty can combine the two states in question in two ways, so that either the one or the other precedes in time; for time itself cannot be perceived, and what precedes and what follows in the object cannot be determined empirically, as it were, in relation to it. I am therefore only conscious that my imagination places the one before and the other after, not that in the object the one state precedes the other before {{ 234 }} the other, or, in other words, by mere perception the ***objective relation*** of the appearances that follow one another remains undetermined. In order that this relation may be cognized as determined, the relation between the two states must be so thought that it is thereby determined as necessary which of them must be placed before and which after, and not vice versa. But the concept that carries with it a necessity of synthetic unity can only be a pure concept of the understanding, which does not lie in perception; and this is here the concept of the ***relation of cause and effect***{{{ 168 }}}, the former of which determines the latter in time as its consequence, and not as something that could merely precede in the imagination (or not be perceived at all). It is therefore only because we subject the succession of appearances, and consequently all alteration, to the law of causality that experience itself, i.e., empirical cognition of them, is possible; consequently, they themselves, as objects of experience, are possible only in accordance with this very law.

The apprehension of the manifold of appearance is always successive. The representations of the parts follow one another. Whether they also follow one another in the object is a second point of reflection, which is not contained in the first. Now one can indeed call everything, and even every representation, insofar as one is conscious of it, an object; but what {{ 235 }} this word is to mean in the case of appearances, not insofar as they (as representations) are objects, but only as designating an object, requires a deeper investigation. Insofar as they, merely as representations, are at the same time objects of consciousness, they are not distinguished at all from apprehension, i.e., from receptivity into the synthesis of the imagination, and one must therefore say that the manifold of appearances is always successively produced in the mind. If appearances were things in themselves, then no human being would be able to estimate from the succession of representations of their manifold how this manifold is connected in the object. For we have to do, after all, only with our representations; how things in themselves may be (without regard to the representations through which they affect us) is entirely outside our sphere of cognition. Now, although appearances are not things in themselves and yet are the only things that can be given to us for cognition, I must show what kind of connection in time belongs to the manifold in the appearances themselves, while the representation of it in apprehension is always successive. Thus, for example, the apprehension of the manifold in the appearance of a house that stands before me is successive. Now the question is whether the manifold of this house itself is also in itself successive, which, of course, no one will admit. {{ 236 }} But as soon as I raise my concepts of an object to transcendental significance, the house is not a thing in itself at all, but only an appearance, i.e., a representation, the transcendental {{{ 169 }}} object of which is indeed unknown; what, then, do I understand by the question of how the manifold in the appearance itself (which is yet nothing in itself) may be connected? Here that which lies in successive apprehension is considered as representation, but the appearance given to me, although it is nothing more than a sum total of these representations, is considered as their object, with which my concept, which I draw from the representations of apprehension, is to agree. One soon sees that, since the agreement of cognition with its object is truth, we can only ask here for the formal conditions of empirical truth, and that appearance, in contrast with the representations of apprehension, can only be represented as their distinct object if it stands under a rule that distinguishes it from every other apprehension and makes a specific kind of connection of the manifold necessary. That in the appearance which contains the condition of this necessary rule of apprehension is the object.

Now let us proceed to our task. That something happens, i.e., that something or a state comes to be which was not before, cannot be empirically {{ 237 }} perceived unless an appearance precedes which does not contain this state in itself; for a reality that follows upon empty time, and thus an arising before which no state of things precedes, can be apprehended just as little as empty time itself. Every apprehension of an event is therefore a perception which follows upon another. But because this is the case with all synthesis of apprehension, as I have shown above in the appearance of a house, it is not yet distinguished thereby from others. Yet I also observe: that if in an appearance which contains an occurrence I call the preceding state of perception A, and the following one B, B can only follow A in apprehension, whereas perception A cannot follow B but can only precede it. I see, for example, a ship drift down the stream. My perception of its position lower down follows upon the perception of its position higher up the course of the river, and it is impossible that in the apprehension of this appearance the ship should be perceived first lower down and afterwards higher up the stream. The order in the succession of perceptions in apprehension is therefore determined here, and to this order the latter is bound. In the previous {{{ 170 }}} example of a house, my perceptions in apprehension could begin at the top and end at the ground, but could also {{ 238 }} begin at the bottom and end at the top, and likewise apprehend the manifold of empirical intuition from right or left. In the series of these perceptions, therefore, there was no determined order which made it necessary where I had to begin in apprehension in order to connect the manifold empirically. But this rule is always to be found in the perception of that which happens, and it makes the order of the successive perceptions (in the apprehension of this appearance) ***necessary***.

I must therefore in our case derive the ***subjective succession*** of apprehension from the ***objective succession*** of appearances, because otherwise the former is entirely undetermined and distinguishes no appearance from another. The former alone proves nothing of the connection of the manifold in the object, because it is entirely arbitrary. The latter will therefore consist in the order of the manifold of appearance, according to which the apprehension of the one (what happens) follows upon that of the other (what precedes) ***according to a rule***. Only thereby can I be justified in saying of the appearance itself, and not merely of my apprehension, that a succession is to be found in it, which means as much as that I cannot perform the apprehension otherwise than in this very succession.

According to such a rule, therefore, there must lie in that which in general precedes an event the condition for a rule, according to which this event always and necessarily follows; conversely, however, I cannot go back from the event and determine (through apprehension) that which precedes. For no appearance goes back from the following point of time to the preceding one, but it does relate to ***some preceding one***; on the other hand, the progress from a given time to the determined following time is necessary. Therefore, since there is indeed something that follows, I must necessarily relate it to something else in general that precedes, and upon which it follows according to a rule, i.e., necessarily, so that the event, as the conditioned, gives a reliable indication of some condition, but this condition determines the event.

Suppose that nothing preceded an event upon which it must follow according to a rule; then all succession of perception {{{ 171 }}} would not be objectively determined in respect of which of the perceptions must actually precede and which must follow. We would in this way have only a play of representations that would relate to no object at all, i.e., by means of our perception one appearance would not be distinguished at all from any other in terms of temporal relations, because the succession in apprehending is everywhere the same and there is thus nothing in the appearance {{ 240 }} that determines it, so that a certain succession is thereby made objectively necessary. I would therefore not say that in the appearance two states follow one another, but only that one apprehension follows upon the other, which is merely something ***subjective*** and determines no object, and hence can by no means count as cognition of any object (not even in the appearance).

If we therefore experience that something happens, we always presuppose in doing so that something precedes it, upon which it follows according to a rule. For without this, I would not say of the object that it follows, because the mere succession in my apprehension, if it is not determined by a rule in relation to our experience, does not justify any succession in the object. It is therefore always in respect of a rule according to which appearances in their succession, i.e., as they happen, are determined by the preceding state, that I make my subjective synthesis (of apprehension) objective, and only under this presupposition alone is even the experience of something that happens possible.

To be sure, it seems as if this contradicts all observations that have always been made concerning the course of the employment of our understanding, according to which we are first guided only by perceived and compared agreeing consequences of many events following upon preceding appearances to discover a rule, {{ 241 }} according to which certain events always follow upon certain appearances, and are thereby first prompted to form for ourselves the concept of cause. On such a footing, this concept would be merely empirical, and the rule which it provides—that everything that happens has a cause—would be just as contingent as experience itself; its universality and necessity would then be merely feigned, and would have no true universal validity, because they would not be grounded _a priori_ but only on induction. But it is with this concept as with other pure representations {{{ 172 }}} _a priori_ (e.g., space and time), which we can extract from experience as clear concepts only because we had put them into experience, and therefore first brought experience itself to pass by means of them. Of course, the logical clarity of this representation of a rule determining the series of events, as a concept of cause, is only possible after we have made use of it in experience; yet a regard to it as a condition of the synthetic unity of appearances in time was nevertheless the ground of experience itself, and therefore preceded it _a priori_.

Our task, therefore, is to show by an example that, even in experience, we never ascribe succession (of an event, in which something happens that was not before) to the object and distinguish it from the subjective succession of our {{ 242 }} apprehension, unless a rule lies at the basis which compels us to observe this order of perceptions rather than another, indeed that this compulsion is actually what first makes the representation of a succession in the object possible.

We have representations within us, of which we can also become conscious. But let this consciousness be as far-extended and as exact or precise as one wills, they nevertheless remain always merely representations, i.e., inner determinations of our mind in this or that temporal relation. How, then, do we come to posit an object for these representations, or, over and above their subjective reality as modifications, to ascribe to them I know not what kind of objective reality? Objective significance cannot consist in the relation to another representation (of that which one would call the object), for otherwise the question recurs: how does this representation in turn go out of itself and obtain objective significance over and above the subjective significance which is proper to it as a determination of the state of mind? If we investigate what new character ***relation to an object*** gives to our representations, and what is the dignity that they obtain thereby, we find that it does nothing more than make the connection of representations necessary in a certain way, {{ 243 }} and subject them to a rule; and, conversely, that objective significance is conferred upon them only because a certain order in the temporal relation of our representations is necessary.

In the synthesis of appearances the manifold of representations always follows one after another. By this means, however, no object {{{ 173 }}} at all is represented, because through this succession, which is common to all apprehensions, nothing is distinguished from anything else. But as soon as I perceive or presuppose that in this succession there is a relation to the preceding state, from which the representation follows in accordance with a rule, then something represents itself as an event, or as what happens there, i.e., I cognize an object which I must place at a certain determined position in time, which cannot be assigned to it otherwise in view of the preceding state. When I therefore perceive that something happens, there is in this representation, first of all, contained: that something precedes, because it is precisely in relation to this that the appearance obtains its temporal relation, namely, that of existing after a preceding time in which it was not. But it can obtain its determined temporal position in this relation only because something is presupposed in the preceding state upon which it always follows, i.e., in accordance with a rule; from which it then results, first, that I cannot reverse the series and place that which happens before that upon which it follows, and second, that if the state {{ 244 }} which precedes is posited, this determined event follows inevitably and necessarily. Thereby it happens that an order arises among our representations, in which the present (insofar as it has come to be) points to some preceding state as an, although still undetermined, correlate of this event that is given, which, however, relates to this event as its determining cause and necessarily connects it with itself in the temporal series.

If, now, it is a necessary law of our sensibility, and thus a ***formal condition*** of all perceptions, that the preceding time necessarily determines the following time (insofar as I cannot obtain the following time except through the preceding one): then it is also an indispensable ***law of the empirical representation*** of the temporal series that the appearances of past time determine every existence in the following time, and that the latter, as events, do not take place except insofar as the former determine their existence in time, i.e., establish it in accordance with a rule. For ***only in appearances can we empirically cognize this continuity in the connection*** of times.

To all experience and its possibility understanding is required, and the first thing that it does for this is not to make the representation of objects distinct, but to make the representation of an object {{ 245 }} in general possible. This happens because it projects the temporal order {{{ 174 }}} onto appearances and their existence, in that it assigns to each of them as a consequence a position in time determined _a priori_ with respect to preceding appearances, without which it would not agree with time itself, which determines its position _a priori_ for all of its parts. This determination of position cannot be borrowed from the relation of appearances to absolute time (for that is no object of perception), but conversely: the appearances themselves must determine their positions in time for one another and make them necessary in the temporal order, i.e., that which follows or happens must follow, in accordance with a universal rule, upon that which was contained in the previous state; from which arises a series of appearances which, by means of the understanding, produces and makes necessary the very same order and continuous connection in the series of possible perceptions as is met with _a priori_ in the form of inner intuition (time), in which all perceptions must have their position.

That, therefore, something happens is a perception which belongs to a possible experience, which becomes actual when I regard the appearance, as to its position in time, as determined, and consequently as an object that can always be found in accordance with a rule in the connection of perceptions {{ 246 }}. But this rule for determining something in accordance with temporal succession is: that in that which precedes, the condition is to be found under which the event always (i.e., necessarily) follows. Therefore, the principle of sufficient reason is the ground of possible experience, namely, of the objective cognition of appearances with respect to their relation in the succession of time.

The ground of proof of this principle, however, rests merely upon the following moments. To all empirical cognition belongs the synthesis of the manifold by the imagination, which is always successive; i.e., the representations in it always follow one after another. But the succession in the imagination is not at all determined as to order (what must precede and what must follow), and the series of successive representations can be taken backwards just as well as forwards. But if this synthesis is a synthesis of apprehension (of the manifold of a given appearance), then the order in the object is determined, or, to speak more precisely, there is in it an order of the successive synthesis that determines an object, according to which something must necessarily precede, {{{ 175 }}} and when this is posited, the other must necessarily follow. If, therefore, my perception is to contain the cognition of an event, namely, that something actually happens, then it must be an empirical judgment in which one thinks that the succession is determined, i.e., that it presupposes {{ 247 }} another appearance in time, upon which it follows necessarily or in accordance with a rule. Otherwise, if I posited the preceding state and the event did not follow upon it necessarily, I would have to consider it as merely a subjective play of my imagination, and, if I nevertheless represented something objective thereby, I would have to call it a mere dream. Thus, the relation of appearances (as possible perceptions) according to which the subsequent event (what happens) is determined as to its existence necessarily and in accordance with a rule in time by something preceding—consequently, the relation of cause to effect—is the condition of the objective validity of our empirical judgments with respect to the series of perceptions, and thus of their empirical truth, and therefore of experience. The principle of the causal relation in the succession of appearances therefore holds for all objects of experience (under the conditions of succession), because it is itself the ground of the possibility of such an experience.

Here, however, a doubt arises which must be removed. The principle of the causal connection among appearances is, in our formula, restricted to their succession, whereas it is found in its employment that it also fits their coexistence, and that cause and effect can be simultaneous. There is, e.g., warmth in {{ 248 }} a room which is not met with in the open air. I look around for the cause, and find a heated stove. Now this, as cause, is simultaneous with its effect, the warmth of the room; here, therefore, there is no succession in time between cause and effect, but they are simultaneous, and yet the law holds. The greater part of the acting causes in nature are simultaneous with their effects, and the temporal succession of the latter is only prompted by the fact that the cause cannot perform its entire effect in one moment. But in the moment in which the effect first arises, it is always simultaneous with the causality of its cause, because if the cause had ceased to exist a moment before, the effect would not have arisen at all. Here it must be carefully noted that it is the ***order*** of time, and not its ***lapse***, that is in question {{{ 176 }}}; the relation remains even if no time has elapsed. The time between the causality of the cause and its immediate effect can be ***vanishing*** (they can thus be simultaneous), but the relation of the one to the other nevertheless remains always determinable in time. If I consider a ball that lies on a stuffed cushion and presses a hollow into it as a cause, then it is simultaneous with its effect. Yet I nevertheless distinguish the two through the temporal relation of their dynamical connection. For if I lay the ball on the cushion, then the hollow follows upon its previous smooth shape; but if the cushion has a hollow (I know not whence), {{ 249 }} a leaden ball does not follow upon it.

Accordingly, succession in time is indeed the only empirical criterion of the effect in relation to the causality of the cause which precedes. The glass is the cause of the rising of the water above its horizontal surface, although both appearances are simultaneous. For as soon as I draw this water from a larger vessel with the glass, something follows, namely, the alteration of the horizontal state which it had there into a concave state which it assumes in the glass.

This causality leads to the concept of action, this to the concept of force, and thereby to the concept of substance. Since I do not wish to mix my critical purpose, which is directed solely to the sources of synthetic cognition _a priori_, with analyses that concern merely the clarification (not the extension) of concepts, I leave the detailed discussion of these to a future system of pure reason; although one already meets with such an analysis in rich measure in the textbooks of this kind hitherto known. Yet I cannot leave untouched the empirical criterion of a substance, insofar as it seems to manifest itself not through the persistence of appearance, but better and more easily through action.

{{ 250 }} Where there is action, consequently activity and force, there also is substance, and in this alone must the seat of that fruitful source of appearances be sought. This is very well said; but if one is to explain what one understands by substance, and wishes in doing so to avoid a vicious circle, then the answer is not so easy. How will one conclude immediately from action to the ***persistence*** of the agent, which is yet such an essential and peculiar {{{ 177 }}} criterion of substance (phaenomenon)? And yet the solution of the question has no such difficulty, though it would be quite insoluble in the common way (of proceeding merely analytically with one's concepts). Action already signifies the relation of the subject of causality to the effect. Since, now, all effect consists in that which happens, consequently in the changeable, which indicates time according to succession, the ultimate subject of the changeable is ***the persistent***, as the substratum of everything that changes, i.e., substance. For, according to the principle of causality, actions are always the first ground of all change of appearances, and therefore cannot lie in a subject that itself changes, because otherwise other actions and another subject which determined this change would be required. By virtue of this, action, as a sufficient {{ 251 }} empirical criterion, proves substantiality, without it being necessary for me first to seek its persistence through compared perceptions, which indeed could not be done in this way with the completeness required for the magnitude and strict universal validity of the concept. For that the first subject of the causality of all arising and perishing cannot itself arise and perish (in the field of appearances) is a safe conclusion, which issues in empirical necessity and persistence in existence, and consequently in the concept of a substance as appearance.

If something happens, the mere arising, without regard to that which arises, is already in itself an object of investigation. The transition from the non-being of a state to this state, even assuming that this state contained no quality in appearance, is alone necessary to investigate. This arising, as was shown in number A, does not affect the substance (for this does not arise), but its state. It is therefore merely alteration, and not origination out of nothing. If this origination is regarded as the effect of a foreign cause, it is called creation, which cannot be admitted as an event among appearances, since its mere possibility would already destroy the unity of experience; although if I consider all things not as phenomena, but as things in themselves and as {{ 252 }} objects of the mere understanding, they can, although they are substances, nevertheless be regarded as dependent in their existence on a foreign cause, which, however, would then entail entirely different word meanings, {{{ 178 }}} and would not apply to appearances as possible objects of experience.

How anything in general can be altered—how it is possible that a state at one point of time can be followed by an opposite state at another—of this we have _a priori_ not the least concept. For this, the knowledge of actual forces is required, which can only be given empirically, e.g., of moving forces, or, what is the same thing, of certain successive appearances (as motions) which indicate such forces. But the form of every alteration, the condition under which alone it can take place as the arising of another state (let its content, i.e., the state that is altered, be what it will), and consequently the succession of the states themselves (that which has happened), can nevertheless be considered _a priori_ in accordance with the law of causality and the conditions of time.[^*]

{{ 253 }} If a substance passes from a state a into another state b, the point of time of the second is distinct from the point of time of the first state and follows it. In the same way, the second state as reality (in appearance) is also distinguished from the first, in which this reality was not, just as b is distinguished from zero; i.e., even if the state b differed from the state a only in magnitude, the alteration is an arising of b - a, which was not in the previous state, and in respect of which that state is = 0.

The question therefore arises: how a thing passes from a state = a into another = b. Between two moments there is always a time, and between two states in those moments there is always a difference which has a magnitude (for all parts of appearances are in turn always magnitudes). Therefore, every transition from one state into another occurs in a time that is contained between two moments, of which the first determines the state from which the thing departs, and the second determines that into which it arrives. Both, therefore, are limits of the time of an alteration, and consequently of the intermediate state between the two states, and they thus {{{ 179 }}} belong to the entire alteration. Now, every alteration has a cause, which proves its causality in the entire time during which the alteration takes place. Therefore, this cause does not produce its alteration {{ 254 }} suddenly (all at once or in a single moment), but in a time, so that, as time grows from the initial moment a to its completion in b, the magnitude of the reality (b - a) is also produced through all the smaller degrees that are contained between the first and the last. All alteration is therefore possible only through a continuous action of causality, which, insofar as it is uniform, is called a moment. The alteration does not consist of these moments, but is produced by them as their effect.

This, now, is the law of the continuity of all alteration, the ground of which is this: that neither time nor the appearance in time consists of parts which are the smallest, and yet that the state of the thing in its alteration passes through all these parts as elements to its second state. There is ***no difference*** of the real in appearance, just as there is no difference in the magnitude of times, that is ***the smallest***; and thus the new state of reality grows from the first state, in which this reality was not, through all the infinite degrees of it, the differences of which from one another are collectively smaller than that between 0 and a.

What utility this principle may have in the investigation of nature is of no concern to us here. But how such a principle, which seems so much to extend our cognition of nature, is possible completely _a priori_ requires very much our examination, even though the evidence of our eyes proves that it is {{ 255 }} actual and correct, and one might therefore believe oneself to be spared the question of how it was possible. For there are so many unfounded pretensions to the extension of our cognition by pure reason that it must be adopted as a universal principle to be thoroughly distrustful in this regard, and, without documents that can provide a thorough deduction, to believe and accept nothing of the kind, even on the clearest dogmatic proof.

All increase of empirical cognition and every progress of perception is nothing but an extension of the determination of inner sense, i.e., a progress in time, let the objects be what they will, whether appearances or pure intuitions. This progress in time determines everything and is in itself determined by nothing {{{ 180 }}} further; i.e., the parts of time are given only in time and through its synthesis, but are not given before it. On this account, every transition in perception to something that follows in time is a determination of time through the production of this perception, and, since time is always and in all its parts a magnitude, the production of a perception as a magnitude through all degrees, of which none is the smallest, from zero up to its determined degree. From this, now, the possibility of cognizing _a priori_ a law of alterations as to their form {{ 256 }} becomes clear. We only anticipate our own apprehension, the formal condition of which, since it dwells in us prior to all given appearance itself, must indeed be capable of being cognized _a priori_.

Thus, just as time contains the sensible condition _a priori_ of the possibility of a continuous progress of that which exists to that which follows, so the understanding, by means of the unity of apperception, is the condition _a priori_ of the possibility of a continuous determination of all positions for the appearances in this time through the series of causes and effects, the former of which inevitably draws after it the existence of the latter, and thereby makes the empirical cognition of temporal relations valid for all time (universally), and consequently objectively valid.

[^*]: Let it be well noted that I am not speaking of the alteration of certain relations in general, but of alteration of state. Therefore, when a body moves uniformly, it does not alter its state (of motion) at all; but it does indeed do so if its motion increases or decreases.
