---
position: 50
label: "General remark on the system of principles"
depth: 7
aa_page: 198
---


## {{ 288 }} General Remark on the System of Principles

It is something very remarkable that we cannot understand the possibility of any thing from the mere category, but must always have an intuition at hand in order to exhibit in it the objective reality of the pure concept of the understanding. Take, for example, the categories of relation. How 1) something can exist only as a ***subject***, not as a mere determination of other things, i.e., can be a ***substance***, or how 2) because something is, something else must be, hence how anything at all can be a cause, or 3) how, if several things are present, from the fact that one of them is there, something follows for the rest and so reciprocally, and how in this way a community of substances can occur, cannot be understood at all from mere concepts. The very same also applies to the other categories, e.g., how a thing can be one and the same with many together, i.e., can be a magnitude, etc.||| As {{{ 199 }}} long, therefore, as intuition is lacking, one does not know whether one thinks an object through the categories, and whether any object at all can ever belong to them; and thus it is confirmed that they are in themselves not ***cognitions*** at all, but mere ***forms of thought*** for making {{ 289 }} cognitions out of given intuitions. From this it also arises that no synthetic proposition can be made from mere categories. For example: in all existence there is substance, i.e., something that can exist only as subject and not as mere predicate; or every thing is a quantum, etc., where there is nothing at all that could serve to go beyond a given concept and to connect another with it. Hence it has also never been possible to prove a synthetic proposition from mere pure concepts of the understanding, e.g., the proposition: everything contingently existing has a cause. One could never go further than to prove that without this relation we ***cannot comprehend at all*** the existence of the contingent, i.e., could not cognize _a priori_ through the understanding the existence of such a thing; from which, however, it does not follow that this very same relation is also the condition of the possibility of things themselves. If, therefore, one wishes to look back to our proof of the principle of causality, one will perceive that we could prove it only of objects of possible experience: everything that happens (every event) presupposes a cause, and indeed in such a way that we could prove it only as a principle of the possibility of experience, and consequently of the ***cognition*** of an object given in ***empirical intuition***, and not from mere concepts. That, nevertheless, the proposition that everything {{ 290 }} contingent must have a cause is clearly evident to everyone from mere concepts, is not to be denied; but in that case the concept of the contingent is already so conceived that it contains not the category of modality (as something whose non-existence ***can be thought***), but rather that of relation (as something that can exist only as a consequence of another), and then indeed it is an identical proposition: That which can exist only as a consequence has its cause. In fact, when we are to give examples of contingent existence, we always appeal to ***alterations***, and not merely to the possibility of the ***thought of the opposite***.[^*] {{{ 200 }}} {{ 291 }} Alteration, however, is an event which, as such, is possible only through a cause, the non-existence of which is therefore in itself possible, and thus we cognize contingency from the fact that something can exist only as the effect of a cause; if, therefore, a thing is assumed to be contingent, it is an analytic proposition to say that it has a cause.

But it is still more remarkable that, in order to understand the possibility of things in accordance with the categories, and thus to demonstrate the ***objective reality*** of the latter, we require not merely intuitions, but indeed always ***outer intuitions***. If, for example, we take the pure concepts of ***relation***, we find that 1) in order to give to the concept of ***substance*** something ***persistent*** in intuition corresponding to it (and thereby to demonstrate the objective reality of this concept), we require an intuition in ***space*** (of matter), because space alone is persistently determined, while time, and thus everything that is in the inner sense, constantly flows. 2) In order to exhibit ***alteration***, as the intuition corresponding to the concept of ***causality***, we must take motion as alteration in space as an example, yes, indeed, by this alone can we make intuitive those alterations whose possibility no pure understanding can comprehend. Alteration is the combination of contradictorily opposed determinations in the existence of one and the same thing. How it is now possible that from a given {{ 292 }} state an opposite state of the very same thing should follow, not only can no reason make comprehensible to itself without an example, but indeed cannot even make understandable to itself without an intuition; and this intuition is that of the motion of a point in space, the existence of which in different places (as a succession of opposite determinations) first makes alteration intuitive to us alone; for in order thereafter to make even inner alterations thinkable to ourselves, we must make time, as the form of inner sense, comprehensible to ourselves figuratively through a line, and the inner alteration through the drawing of this line (motion), consequently the successive {{{ 201 }}} existence of ourselves in different states comprehensible to us through outer intuition; the proper ground of which is this, that all alteration presupposes something persistent in intuition, in order even to be perceived itself as alteration, whereas in inner sense no persistent intuition at all is to be found. – Finally, the category of ***community*** is, as regards its possibility, not to be comprehended at all by mere reason, and thus the objective reality of this concept cannot be seen without intuition, and indeed outer intuition in space. For how would one want to think the possibility that, when several substances exist, from the existence of one something (as an effect) can follow reciprocally for the existence of the other, and thus, because there is something in {{ 293 }} the former, there must also be something in the other, which cannot be understood from the existence of the latter alone? For this is required for community, but is not comprehensible at all among things, each of which completely isolates itself through its subsistence. Hence Leibniz, in ascribing a community to the substances of the world as thought by the understanding alone, required a divinity for mediation; for from their existence alone it seemed to him, with right, incomprehensible. We can, however, make the possibility of community (of substances as appearances) very easily comprehensible to ourselves if we represent them in space, hence in outer intuition. For this already contains in itself _a priori_ formal outer relations as conditions of the possibility of the real ones (in action and reaction, consequently in community). — Likewise it can easily be shown that the possibility of things as ***magnitudes***, and thus the objective reality of the category of magnitude, can also be exhibited only in outer intuition, and by means of it alone subsequently applied also to inner sense. But, in order to avoid prolixity, I must leave the examples of this to the reflection of the reader.

This entire remark is of great importance, not only in order to confirm our preceding refutation of idealism, but much more still, when we come to speak of ***self-cognition*** from mere inner consciousness {{ 294 }} and the determination of our nature without the assistance of outer empirical intuitions, to show us the limits of the possibility of such a cognition.

The final conclusion of this entire section is therefore: All principles of the pure understanding are nothing more than principles _a priori_ {{{ 202 }}} of the possibility of experience, and to the latter alone do all synthetic propositions _a priori_ relate, indeed their possibility itself rests entirely on this relation.

[^*]: One can easily think the non-existence of matter, but the ancients did not therefore infer its contingency. But even the change of being and non-being of a given state of a thing, in which all alteration consists, does not prove at all the contingency of this state, as it were from the reality of its opposite, e.g., the rest of a body which follows upon its motion does not yet prove the contingency of its motion because the former is the opposite of the latter. For this opposite is here only logically, not ***realiter***, ***opposed*** to the other. One would have to prove that ***instead*** of the motion in the preceding moment it had been possible that the body had rested ***at that time***, in order to prove the contingency of its motion, not that it rests ***afterward***; for there both opposites can very well coexist.
