---
position: 51
label: "Chapter 3. On the ground of the distinction of all objects in general into phenomena and noumena"
depth: 5
aa_page: 202
---


## Chapter 3. On the Ground of the Distinction of All Objects in General into Phenomena and Noumena

We have now not only traveled through the land of pure understanding and carefully inspected every part of it, but we have also measured it out and determined for every thing therein its proper place. This land, however, is an island and enclosed by nature itself within unalterable limits. It is the land of truth (a charming {{ 295 }} name), surrounded by a vast and stormy ocean, the proper seat of illusion, where many a fog bank and many a rapidly melting sheet of ice fake new lands, and, while incessantly deceiving the seafaring adventurer who is roaming about for discoveries with empty hopes, entangle him in adventures from which he can never desist and yet which he can also never bring to an end. Before we venture upon this sea, however, in order to search through it in all latitudes and become certain whether there is anything to be hoped for in them, it will be useful first to cast another glance at the map of the land that we are just about to leave, and first to ask whether we might not, after all, be satisfied with what it contains, or even must be satisfied out of necessity if there is otherwise no ground anywhere upon which we could build a home; secondly, under what title we then possess this very land and can hold ourselves secure against all hostile claims. Although we have already sufficiently answered these questions in the course of the Analytic, {{{ 203 }}} a summary review of their solutions can nevertheless strengthen our conviction by uniting their moments in a single point.

Namely, we have seen: that whatever the understanding draws from itself without borrowing it from experience, it nevertheless has for no other purpose than solely for empirical use. The principles {{ 296 }} of pure understanding, whether they be constitutive _a priori_ (like the mathematical ones) or merely regulative (like the dynamical ones), contain nothing but, as it were, only the pure schema for possible experience; for this experience has its unity only from the synthetic unity which the understanding originally and of itself imparts to the synthesis of the imagination in relation to apperception, and to which the appearances, as data for a possible cognition, must already stand _a priori_ in relation and agreement. But although these rules of the understanding are not only true _a priori_, but are even the source of all truth, i.e., of the agreement of our cognition with objects, by virtue of the fact that they contain within themselves the ground of the possibility of experience as the sum total of all cognition wherein objects may be given to us, it nevertheless does not seem to us sufficient to have merely that which is true set before us, but rather that which we desire to know. If, therefore, we learn nothing more through this critical investigation than what we would also have practiced of ourselves in the merely empirical use of the understanding even without such subtle research, then it would seem that the advantage drawn from it is not worth the expense and preparation. Now, to this one can indeed answer: that no inquisitiveness is more detrimental to the extension of our cognition than that which {{ 297 }} always wants to know the utility in advance, before one engages in investigations, and before one could make for oneself the least concept of this utility, even if it were placed before one's eyes. Yet there is nonetheless an advantage that can be made comprehensible and at the same time important even to the most difficult and reluctant apprentice of such transcendental research, namely this: that the understanding, which is occupied merely with its empirical use and does not reflect upon the sources of its own cognition, may indeed get along very well, but there is one thing it cannot perform at all, namely, to determine for itself the limits of its use and to know what may lie within or outside its entire sphere; for to this end precisely those deep {{{ 204 }}} investigations are required which we have conducted. If, however, he cannot distinguish whether certain questions lie within his horizon or not, then he is never secure in his claims and his possession, but must expect only manifold embarrassing reprimands when he incessantly transgresses the boundaries of his domain (as is inevitable) and loses himself in delusion and illusions.

That the understanding, therefore, can never make any other than an empirical, and never a transcendental use of all its principles _a priori_, yes, of all its concepts, is a proposition that, if it can be cognized with {{ 298 }} conviction, points to important consequences. The transcendental use of a concept in any principle is this: that it is referred to things ***in general*** and ***in themselves***, whereas the empirical use is when it is referred merely to ***appearances***, i.e., objects of a possible ***experience***. That, however, only the latter can take place anywhere, is seen from the following. For every concept, there is required first the logical form of a concept (of thinking) in general, and then secondly also the possibility of giving to it an object to which it may refer. Without this latter, it has no sense and is completely empty of content, although it may still contain the logical function for making a concept out of any possible data. Now, the object cannot be given to a concept otherwise than in intuition; and even if a pure intuition is still possible _a priori_ before the object, yet even this pure intuition can obtain its object, and consequently its objective validity, only through empirical intuition, of which it is the mere form. Thus all concepts, and with them all principles, however possible they may be _a priori_, nevertheless refer to empirical intuitions, i.e., to data for possible experience. Without this, they have no objective validity at all, but are a mere play, whether of the imagination or of the understanding, with their respective representations. One need only take the concepts of mathematics as an {{ 299 }} example, and indeed first in their pure intuitions. Space has three dimensions, between two points there can be only one straight line, etc. Although all of these principles, and the representation of the object with which this science occupies itself, are generated in the mind completely _a priori_, they would yet mean nothing at all, if we could not always present their meaning in appearances (empirical objects). Hence it is also required to ***make sensible*** an isolated concept, {{{ 205 }}} i.e., to present the object corresponding to it in intuition, because without this, the concept (as they say) would remain without ***sense***, i.e., without meaning. Mathematics fulfills this requirement through the construction of the figure, which is an appearance present to the senses (although brought about _a priori_). The concept of magnitude seeks in the very same science its support and sense in number, and this, in turn, in the fingers, the beads of the abacus, or the strokes and points that are placed before the eyes. The concept remains always generated _a priori_ together with the synthetic principles or formulas from such concepts; but the use of them and their relation to alleged objects can in the end be sought nowhere but in experience, the possibility of which (as regards form) they contain _a priori_.

{{ 300 }} That this, however, is also the case with all categories and the principles spun from them, is also evident from this: that we cannot even define a single one of them in a real way, i.e., make the possibility of its object intelligible, without immediately descending to conditions of sensibility, consequently to the form of appearances, to which as their sole objects they must consequently be restricted; because, if one removes this condition, all meaning, i.e., relation to the object, disappears, and one cannot make comprehensible to oneself by any example what sort of thing is actually meant under such concepts.

The concept of magnitude in general no one can explain, except perhaps thus: that it is the determination of a thing whereby it can be thought how many times one is posited in it. But this 'how many times' is grounded on successive repetition, and consequently on time and the synthesis (of the homogeneous) therein. Reality can be explained in contrast with negation only if we think of a time (as the sum total of all being) which is either filled with something or {{{ 206 }}} empty. If I omit permanence (which is existence at all times), nothing remains for me of the concept of substance but the logical representation of the subject, which I believe I realize by representing to myself something that can exist only as subject (without being a predicate of anything else). {{ 301 }} But not only is it the case that I know of no conditions under which this logical privilege would belong to any thing, but also nothing further can be made of it and not the least consequence drawn from it, because thereby no object of the use of this concept is determined, and one thus does not know at all whether this means anything anywhere. From the concept of cause I would (if I omit the time in which something follows upon something else according to a rule) find nothing further in the pure category than that it is something from which the existence of another can be inferred; and thereby not only would cause and effect be completely indistinguishable from each other, but because this ability to infer requires conditions of which I know nothing, the concept would have no determination at all as to how it fits any object. The supposed principle: 'Everything contingent has a cause,' indeed appears quite grandly, as if it had its own dignity in itself. But if I ask: 'What do you understand by contingent?' and you answer, 'that whose non-being is possible,' then I should like to know how you want to cognize this possibility of non-being, if you do not represent to yourselves a succession in the series of appearances and in this succession an existence that follows upon non-being (or vice versa), and consequently a change; for that the non-being of a thing does not contradict itself is a lame {{ 302 }} appeal to a logical condition which is indeed necessary for the concept, but far from sufficient for real possibility; just as I can in thought abolish any existing substance without contradicting myself, but from this I cannot infer at all the objective contingency of its existence, i.e., the possibility of its non-being in itself. As regards the concept of community, it is easy to estimate that, since the pure categories of substance as well as causality admit of no explanation that determines the object, reciprocal causality in the relation of substances to one another (commercium) is just as little capable of it. Possibility, existence, and necessity no one has ever been able to explain otherwise than through obvious tautology, if one wanted to draw their definition solely from the pure {{{ 207 }}} understanding. For the trick of substituting the logical possibility of the ***concept*** (in that it does not contradict itself) for the transcendental possibility of ***things*** (in that an object corresponds to the concept) can deceive and satisfy only the inexperienced.[^*]

{{ 303 }} From this it flows undisputably: that the pure concepts of the understanding can ***never*** be of ***transcendental***, but ***always*** only of ***empirical*** use, and that the principles of pure understanding can be referred only to the general conditions of a possible experience, to objects of the senses, but never to things in general (without taking into regard the way in which we may intuit them).

The transcendental Analytic has accordingly this important result: that the understanding can never accomplish more _a priori_ than to anticipate the form of a possible experience in general, and, since that which is not appearance cannot be an object of experience, that it can never transgress the limits of sensibility, within which alone objects are given to us. Its principles are merely principles of the exposition of appearances, and the proud name of an Ontology, which presumes to give synthetic _a priori_ cognitions of things in general in a systematic doctrine (e.g., the principle of causality), must give way to the modest name of a mere Analytic of pure understanding.

{{ 304 }} Thinking is the act of referring given intuition to an object. If the mode of this intuition is not given in any way, then the object is merely transcendental, and the concept of the understanding has no other than a transcendental use, namely, the unity of the thinking of a manifold in general. Through a pure category, now, in which abstraction is made from all conditions of sensible intuition {{{ 208 }}} as the only one possible for us, no object is determined, but only the thinking of an object in general is expressed according to different modis. Now, to the use of a concept there belongs, in addition, a function of the power of judgment, whereby an object is subsumed under it, hence at least the formal condition under which something can be given in intuition. If this condition of the power of judgment (schema) is lacking, then all subsumption disappears; for nothing is given that could be subsumed under the concept. The merely transcendental use of the categories, therefore, is in fact no use at all and has no determined or even as regards form determinable object. From this it follows that the pure category also does not suffice for any synthetic _a priori_ principle, and that the principles of pure understanding are only of empirical, never of transcendental {{ 305 }} use, and that beyond the field of possible experience there can be no synthetic _a priori_ principles anywhere.

There lies, however, a difficult-to-avoid illusion at the basis here. The categories, as regards their origin, are not grounded on sensibility like the ***forms of intuition***, space and time; they seem, therefore, to permit an application extended beyond all objects of the senses. {{{ 209 }}} Yet they, for their part, are again nothing but ***forms of thought***, which contain merely the logical faculty of uniting the manifold given in intuition {{ 306 }} into an _a priori_ consciousness; and thus, if one takes away from them the only intuition possible for us, they can have even less meaning than those pure sensible forms, through which at least an object is given, whereas a mode of connection of the manifold peculiar to our understanding means nothing at all if that intuition, in which alone this manifold can be given, is not added. — Nevertheless, it is already contained in our concept, when we call certain objects, as appearances, beings of sense (_Phaenomena_), by distinguishing the way we intuit them from their constitution in themselves: that we either place the very same objects according to this latter constitution, even if we do not intuit them in it, or also other possible things that are not objects of our senses at all, as objects thought merely through the understanding, over against the former, as it were, and call them beings of the understanding (_Noumena_). Now the question arises: whether our pure concepts of understanding might not have meaning in view of this latter, and be a mode of cognizing them?

Right at the beginning, however, an ambiguity here shows itself which can occasion great misunderstanding: namely, that since the understanding, when it calls an object in one relation merely a phenomenon, at the same time and besides this relation makes for itself a representation of an ***object in itself*** {{ 307 }} and therefore represents to itself that it can also make ***concepts*** of such an object, and since the understanding delivers no others than the categories, the object in the latter meaning must at least be able to be thought through these pure concepts of understanding; whereby, however, it is misled into holding the completely ***undetermined*** concept of a being of the understanding, as a something in general outside our sensibility, for a ***determined*** concept of a being which we could in some way cognize through the understanding.

If by noumenon we understand a thing ***insofar as it is not an object of our sensible intuition***, by abstracting from our mode of intuition of it, this is a noumenon in the ***negative*** sense. If, however, we understand by it an ***object*** of a ***non-sensible intuition***, then we assume a special mode of intuition, namely, the intellectual, which, however, is not ours, and the {{{ 210 }}} possibility of which we cannot even comprehend, and this would be the noumenon in the ***positive*** meaning.

The doctrine of sensibility is now at the same time the doctrine of noumena in the negative sense, i.e., of things which the understanding must think without this relation to our mode of intuition, and thus not merely as appearances but as things in themselves, of which, however, in this abstraction, it at the same time comprehends that it can make no use of its {{ 308 }} categories in this way of considering them: because, since these have meaning only in relation to the unity of intuitions in space and time, they can determine this very unity only by means of general concepts of connection _a priori_ due to the mere ideality of space and time. Where this unity of time cannot be encountered, and consequently in the case of the noumenon, there the entire use, yes, even all meaning of the categories completely ceases; for even the possibility of the things that are to correspond to the categories cannot be comprehended at all, as to which I need only refer to what I adduced right at the beginning of the general remark to the preceding chapter. Now, however, the possibility of a thing can never be proved merely from the non-contradiction of its concept, but only by corroborating this concept with an intuition corresponding to it. If we therefore wanted to apply the categories to objects that are not regarded as appearances, we would have to lay at the basis an intuition other than the sensible, and then the object would be a noumenon in the ***positive*** meaning. Since, now, such an intuition, namely, the intellectual, lies absolutely outside our faculty of cognition, the use of the categories can in no way reach beyond the boundary of the objects of experience; and although beings of the understanding indeed correspond to beings of sense, {{ 309 }} and there may also be beings of the understanding to which our sensible faculty of intuition has no relation at all, yet our concepts of the understanding, as mere forms of thought for our sensible intuition, do not reach in the least beyond these; what is therefore called a noumenon by us must be understood as such only in the ***negative*** meaning.

If I take away all thinking (through categories) from an empirical cognition, {{{ 211 }}} no cognition of any object remains at all; for through mere intuition nothing is thought, and that this affection of sensibility is in me constitutes no relation of such representation to any object. But if, on the contrary, I leave out all intuition, there still remains the form of thinking, i.e., the mode of determining an object for the manifold of a possible intuition. To this extent, therefore, the categories extend further than sensible intuition, because they think objects in general without yet looking to the special mode (of sensibility) in which they may be given. But they do not thereby determine a larger sphere of objects, because we cannot assume that such objects can be given without presupposing that a mode of intuition other than the sensible is possible, to which, however, we are in no way entitled.

{{ 310 }} I call a concept problematic that contains no contradiction, which also, as a limitation of given concepts, is connected with other cognitions, but whose objective reality can in no way be cognized. The concept of a ***noumenon***, i.e., of a thing which is not to be thought as an object of the senses, but rather as a thing in itself (solely through a pure understanding), is not at all contradictory; for one cannot assert of sensibility that it is the only possible mode of intuition. Furthermore, this concept is necessary in order not to extend sensible intuition even over things in themselves, and thus to limit the objective validity of sensible cognition (for the rest, to which sensible intuition does not reach, are called noumena for this very reason, so that one may thereby indicate that those cognitions cannot extend their domain over everything that the understanding thinks). In the end, however, the possibility of such _noumenorum_ is not to be comprehended at all, and the domain outside the sphere of appearances is (for us) empty, i.e., we have an understanding that extends ***problematically*** further than appearances, but no intuition, indeed not even the concept of a possible intuition, through which objects could be given to us outside the field of sensibility and the understanding could be used ***assertorically*** beyond the latter. The concept of a noumenon {{ 311 }} is therefore merely a ***limiting concept***, in order to restrict the pretension of sensibility, and is therefore only of negative use. It is, however, nonetheless not arbitrarily invented, but is connected with the limitation of {{{ 212 }}} sensibility, without, however, being able to posit anything positive outside its domain.

The division of objects into _Phaenomena_ and _Noumena_, and of the world into a world of sense and a world of understanding, can therefore not be admitted at all in a positive meaning, although concepts certainly admit of the division into sensible and intellectual ones; for one cannot determine any object for the latter and thus also cannot represent them as objectively valid. If one departs from the senses, how will one make comprehensible that our categories (which would be the only remaining concepts for noumena) still mean anything at all, since for their relation to any object something more than merely the unity of thinking, namely, in addition, a possible intuition must be given to which they can be applied? The concept of a noumenon, taken merely problematically, remains notwithstanding not only admissible, but also, as a concept keeping sensibility within limits, unavoidable. But in that case, this is not a special ***intelligible object*** for our understanding, but rather an understanding to which it would belong is itself a problem, namely, to cognize its object not discursively, through categories {{ 312 }}, but intuitively, in a non-sensible intuition, of the possibility of which we cannot make for ourselves the least representation. Our understanding now obtains in this way a negative extension, i.e., it is not limited by sensibility, but rather limits sensibility, by calling things in themselves (not as appearances considered) noumena. But it also immediately sets limits to itself, not to cognize them through any categories, and consequently only to think them under the name of an unknown something.

I find, however, in the writings of modern authors a completely different use of the expressions of a mundi sensibilis and intelligibilis,[^**] which {{{ 213 }}} departs entirely from the sense of the ancients, and in which indeed no difficulty is found, but also nothing but empty word-mongering is encountered. According to this, it has pleased some to call the sum total of appearances, insofar as it is intuited, the world of sense, but insofar as the connection thereof is thought according to general laws of the understanding, the {{ 313 }} world of understanding. Theoretical astronomy, which presents the mere observation of the starry sky, would represent the former, whereas contemplative astronomy (explained, say, according to the Copernican system of the world, or even according to Newton's laws of gravitation) would represent the second, namely, an intelligible world. But such a twist of words is a mere sophistical evasion to escape a difficult question, by lowering its sense to one's own convenience. In regard to appearances, understanding and reason can indeed be used; but the question is whether these still have any use when the object is not appearance (noumenon), and in this sense it is taken when it is thought as in itself merely intelligible, i.e., given to the understanding alone and not at all to the senses. The question is therefore: whether, besides that empirical use of the understanding (even in the Newtonian representation of the structure of the world), a transcendental use is still possible which would go to the noumenon as an object, which question we have answered negatively.

Thus, when we say: the senses represent objects to us ***as they appear***, but the understanding represents them ***as they are***, the latter is not to be taken in a transcendental, but in a merely empirical meaning, namely, how they, as objects of experience, must be represented in the thoroughgoing {{ 314 }} connection of appearances, and not according to what they may be apart from relation to possible experience and consequently to senses in general, hence as objects of pure understanding. For this will always remain unknown to us, so much so that it also remains unknown whether such a transcendental (extraordinary) cognition is possible at all, at least as one that stands under our ordinary categories. ***Understanding*** and ***sensibility*** can determine objects in our case ***only in combination***. If we separate them, we have intuitions without concepts, or concepts without intuitions, but in both cases representations which we cannot refer to any determined object.

If anyone still hesitates to renounce the merely transcendental use of the categories upon all these discussions, {{{ 214 }}} let him make a trial of them in some synthetic assertion. For an analytic assertion does not carry the understanding any further, and since it is occupied only with what is already thought in the concept, it leaves it undecided whether this concept in itself has relation to objects, or means only the unity of thinking in general (which completely abstracts from the way in which an object may be given); it is enough for the understanding to know what lies in its concept; it is indifferent to it to what the concept itself may refer {{ 315 }}. Let him accordingly try it with some synthetic and supposedly transcendental principle, such as: 'Everything that is exists as substance, or as a determination adhering to it'; 'Everything contingent exists as the effect of another thing, namely its cause,' etc. Now I ask: whence will he take these synthetic propositions, since the concepts are not to hold relatively to possible experience, but of things in themselves (noumena)? Where is here the third thing which is always required for a synthetic proposition, in order to connect with one another in it concepts that have no logical (analytic) affinity at all? He will never prove his proposition, yes, what is even more, he will not even be able to justify himself regarding the possibility of such a pure assertion, without taking into regard the empirical use of the understanding and thereby completely renouncing the pure and sense-free judgment. Thus the concept of pure, merely intelligible objects is completely devoid of any principles of its application, because one cannot devise any way in which they should be given, and the problematic thought, which nevertheless leaves a place open for them, serves only like an empty space to limit the empirical principles, without, however, containing and pointing out any other object of cognition outside the sphere of the latter.

[^*]: In a word, all of these concepts cannot be corroborated by anything, and their real possibility shown thereby, if all sensible intuition (the only one we have) is removed, and there remains then only the logical possibility, i.e., that the concept (thought) is possible, of which, however, we are not speaking, but rather whether it refers to an object and thus means something.

[^**]: One must not, instead of this expression, use that of an ***intellectual*** world, as is commonly done in German expositions; for only ***cognitions*** are intellectual or sensitive. What can only be an ***object*** of the one or the other mode of intuition, the objects therefore, must (notwithstanding the harshness of the sound) be called intelligible or sensible.
