---
position: 52
label: "Appendix. Of the amphiboly of concepts of reflection"
depth: 5
aa_page: 214
---


## {{ 316 }} Appendix. 

## Of the Amphiboly of Concepts of Reflection Of the Amphiboly of Concepts of Reflection through the Confusion of the Empirical Use of the Understanding with the Transcendental.

Reflection (_reflexio_) does not concern itself with objects themselves, in order to obtain concepts from them directly, but is the state {{{ 215 }}} of mind in which we first prepare ourselves to find out the subjective conditions under which we can arrive at concepts. It is the consciousness of the relation of given representations to our different sources of cognition, through which alone their relation to one another can be correctly determined. The first question prior to all further treatment of our representation is this: to which faculty of cognition do they belong together? Is it the understanding, or is it the senses, before which they are connected or compared? Many a judgment is accepted from habit or tied by inclination; but because no reflection precedes it, or at least critically follows upon it, it is taken for one that has obtained its origin in the understanding. Not all judgments require an ***investigation***, i.e., an attention to the grounds of truth; for if they {{ 317 }} are immediately certain, e.g., between two points there can be only one straight line, then no closer mark of truth than that which they themselves express can be indicated of them. But all judgments, indeed all comparisons, require a ***reflection***, i.e., a distinction of the power of cognition to which the given concepts belong. The action by which I hold together the comparison of representations in general with the power of cognition in which it is made, and by which I distinguish whether they are compared with one another as belonging to pure understanding or to sensible intuition, I call ***transcendental reflection***. The relation, however, in which concepts can belong to one another in a state of mind is that of ***identity*** and ***difference***, of ***agreement*** and ***opposition***, of the ***inner*** and the ***outer***, and finally of the ***determinable*** and the ***determination*** (matter and form). The correct determination of this relation rests on the power of cognition to which they ***subjectively*** belong together, whether in sensibility or in the understanding. For the difference of the latter makes a great difference in the way in which we ought to think the former.

Prior to all objective judgments, we compare concepts in order to arrive at ***identity*** (of many representations under one concept) for the sake of ***universal*** judgments, or at their **difference** for the generation of ***particular*** ones, at **agreement**, from which ***affirmative*** judgments can arise, and {{{ 216 }}} ***opposition***, from which negative judgments can arise, etc. For this reason, we should, as it seems, call the cited concepts concepts of comparison (_conceptus comparationis_). But because, when it is not the logical form but the content of the concepts that matters, i.e., whether the things themselves are identical or different, in agreement or in opposition, etc., things can have a twofold relation to our power of cognition, namely to sensibility and to the understanding, and yet upon this place, ***in which*** they belong, depends the way ***how*** they are to belong to one another: so transcendental reflection, i.e., the relation of given representations to one or the other kind of cognition, alone will be able to determine their relation to one another; and whether the things are identical or different, in agreement or in opposition, etc., cannot be determined immediately from the concepts themselves by mere comparison (_comparatio_), but only through the distinction of the kind of cognition to which they belong, by means of a transcendental reflection (_reflexio_). One could therefore indeed say: that ***logical reflection*** is a mere comparison, for in its case the power of cognition to which the given representations belong is completely abstracted from, and they are therefore to be treated, as far as their seat in the mind is concerned, as {{ 319 }} homogeneous; ***transcendental reflection***, however, (which goes to the objects themselves) contains the ground of the possibility of the objective comparison of representations with one another and is thus very different from the former, because the power of cognition to which they belong is not the very same. This transcendental reflection is a duty from which no one can exempt himself if he wishes to judge anything _a priori_ about things. We will now take it in hand, and shall draw from it no little light for determining the proper business of the understanding.

1. ***Identity*** and ***Difference***. If an object is presented to us several times, but each time with the very same inner determinations (_qualitas et quantitas_), then, if it counts as an object of pure understanding, it is always the very same and not many, but only one thing (_numerica identitas_); if it is, however, an appearance, then the comparison of concepts does not matter at all, but, however much everything may be identical in respect of them, yet the difference of the places of this appearance at the same time is a sufficient ground of the ***numerical difference*** of the object (of the senses) {{{ 217 }}} itself. Thus, in the case of two drops of water, one can completely abstract from all inner difference (of quality and quantity), and it is enough that they are intuited in different places at the same time for them to be held to be numerically {{ 320 }} different. Leibniz took appearances for things in themselves, and consequently for _intelligibilia_, i.e., objects of the pure understanding (although on account of the confusion of their representations he designated them by the name of phenomena), and there his principle of the ***indiscernible*** (_principium identitatis indiscernibilium_) could indeed not be disputed; but since they are objects of sensibility, and the understanding in respect of them is not of pure but merely empirical use, multiplicity and numerical difference are already indicated by space itself as the condition of outer appearances. For a part of space, although it may be completely similar and equal to another, is yet outside it and precisely thereby a part different from the first, which is added to it in order to make up a greater space; and this must therefore hold of everything that is in the various positions of space at the same time, however much it may otherwise be similar and equal to itself.

2. ***Agreement*** and ***Opposition***. If reality is represented only by the pure understanding (_realitas noumenon_), then no opposition can be thought between realities, i.e., such a relation in which they, connected in one subject, cancel each other's consequences, and 3 - 3 = 0. On the other hand, the real in appearance (_realitas phaenomenon_) {{ 321 }} can indeed be in opposition with one another and, united in the same subject, one can entirely or in part destroy the ***consequence of the other***, like two moving forces in the same straight line, insofar as they either pull or push a point in opposite directions, or also a pleasure that holds the balance against pain.

3. The ***Inner*** and the ***Outer***. On an object of pure understanding, only that is inner which has no relation at all (as to its existence) to anything different from itself. On the other hand, the inner determinations of a _substantia phaenomenon_ in space are nothing but relations, and it itself is entirely an epitome of mere relations. We know substance in space only through forces that are active in it, either to drive others thither (attraction) or to prevent them from penetrating into it (repulsion and impenetrability); we know no other properties that make up the concept {{{ 218 }}} of the substance that appears in space and which we call matter. As an object of pure understanding, by contrast, every substance must have inner determinations and forces that go to inner reality. But what inner accidents can I think for myself other than those which my inner sense presents to me, namely, that which is either itself a ***thinking*** or analogous to it? Hence Leibniz made simple subjects, endowed with powers of representation, in a word, **monads**, out of {{ 322 }} all substances, because he represented them to himself as _Noumena_, even out of the constituent parts of matter, after he had in thought taken away from them everything that might signify outer relation, and consequently also ***composition***.

4. ***Matter*** and ***Form***. These are two concepts that are laid at the ground of all other reflection, so very are they inseparably connected with every use of the understanding. The former signifies the determinable in general, the second its determination (both in a transcendental sense, since one abstracts from all difference of what is given and the way it is determined). Logicians formerly called the universal the matter, but the specific difference the form. In every judgment, one can call the given concepts logical matter (for the judgment), and their relation (by means of the copula) the form of the judgment. In every being, its constituent parts (_essentialia_) are the matter, and the way they are connected in a thing is the essential form. Also, in respect of things in general, unlimited reality was regarded as the matter of all possibility, but its limitation (negation) as that form by which one thing is distinguished from another according to transcendental concepts. For the understanding first demands that something be given {{ 323 }} (at least in the concept) in order to be able to determine it in a certain way. Hence, in the concept of pure understanding, matter precedes form, and for that reason Leibniz first assumed things (monads) and thus internally a power of representation in them, in order thereafter to ground their outer relation and the community of their states (namely, of representations) thereon. Hence space and time were possible, the former only through the relation of substances, the latter through the connection of their determinations with one another as grounds and consequences. Thus indeed it would have to be, if the pure understanding could be related immediately to objects, and if space and {{{ 219 }}} time were determinations of things in themselves. But if they are only sensible intuitions, in which we determine all objects merely as appearances, then the form of intuition (as a subjective constitution of sensibility) precedes all matter (sensations), consequently space and time precede all appearances and all _datis_ of experience, and rather make these possible for the very first time. The intellectual philosopher could not bear that form should precede things themselves and determine their possibility—a completely correct censure, if he assumed that we intuit things as they are (though with a confused representation). But since sensible intuition {{ 324 }} is a completely special subjective condition which lies at the ground of all perception _a priori_, and the form of which is original, so the form is given for itself alone, and far from the matter (or the things themselves, which appear) having to lie at the ground (as one would have to judge according to mere concepts), their possibility rather presupposes a formal intuition (time and space) as given.

## Remark on the Amphiboly of Concepts of Reflection

Allow me to call the place which we assign to a concept, whether in sensibility or in pure understanding, the ***transcendental place***. In such a way, the assessment of this place, which belongs to each concept according to the difference of its use, and the instruction according to rules for determining this place for all concepts, would be the ***transcendental topic***; a doctrine that would thoroughly preserve us from the surreptions of pure understanding and the illusions arising therefrom, by always distinguishing to which faculty of cognition the concepts properly belong. One can call every concept, every title under which many cognitions belong, a ***logical place***. On this is based the ***logical topic*** of ***Aristotle***, of which schoolteachers and orators could make use, in order to look up under certain titles of thought {{ 325 }} what would best suit a given matter, and to ratiocinate about it with a show of thoroughness, or to chatter wordily.

{{{ 220 }}} The transcendental topic, on the contrary, contains no more than the cited four titles of all comparison and distinction, which differ from categories in that by them the object is represented not according to what makes up its concept (magnitude, reality), but only the comparison of representations, which precedes the concept of things, is represented in all its manifoldness. This comparison, however, first requires a reflection, i.e., a determination of that place to which the representations of the things that are compared belong, whether the pure understanding thinks them, or sensibility gives them in appearance.

Concepts can be compared logically without troubling oneself about where their objects belong, whether as noumena to the understanding or as phenomena to sensibility. But if we wish to go to the objects with these concepts, then transcendental reflection is first necessary as to for which power of cognition they are to be objects, whether for the pure understanding or for sensibility. Without this reflection, I make a very insecure use of these concepts, {{ 326 }} and there arise supposed synthetic principles which critical reason cannot acknowledge, and which are based solely on a transcendental amphiboly, i.e., a confusion of the pure object of the understanding with the appearance.

For want of such a transcendental topic, and consequently deceived by the amphiboly of the concepts of reflection, the celebrated Leibniz erected an ***intellectual system of the world***, or rather believed he could cognize the inner constitution of things by comparing all objects merely with the understanding and the abstracted formal concepts of his thought. Our table of the concepts of reflection procures for us the unexpected advantage of placing before our eyes what is distinctive of his system of doctrine in all its parts, and at the same time the leading ground of this peculiar way of thinking, which rested on nothing but a misunderstanding. He compared all things with one another merely through concepts, and found, as was natural, no other differences than those by which the understanding distinguishes its pure concepts from one another. He did not regard the conditions of sensible intuition, which bring their own differences with them, as original; for sensibility was to him only a confused mode of representation and not a special source of representations; appearance was to him the representation ***of the thing*** {{{ 221 }}} ***in itself***, though distinguished from cognition through the understanding as to its logical {{ 327 }} form, since the former, in its usual lack of analysis, draws a certain mixture of subordinate representations into the concept of the thing, which the understanding knows how to separate from it. In a word, **Leibniz** ***intellectualized*** appearances, just as Locke, according to his system of ***noogony*** (if I may be permitted to use these expressions), had entirely ***sensified*** the concepts of the understanding, i.e., represented them as nothing but empirical or abstracted concepts of reflection. Instead of seeking in the understanding and sensibility two completely different sources of representations, which, however, could judge with objective validity of things ***only in connection***, each of these great men held to only one of the two, which in his opinion related immediately to things in themselves, while the other did nothing but confuse or order the representations of the first.

***Leibniz*** accordingly compared the objects of the senses with one another merely in the understanding, as things in general. ***First***, insofar as they are to be judged by it as identical or different. Since he therefore had in view merely their concepts and not their place in intuition, in which alone objects can be given, and completely disregarded the transcendental place of these concepts (whether the object is to be counted among appearances or among things in themselves), {{ 328 }} it could not turn out otherwise than that he extended his principle of the indiscernible, which holds merely of concepts of things in general, also to the objects of the senses (_mundus phaenomenon_), and believed he had thereby procured no small extension for the cognition of nature. To be sure, if I know a drop of water as a thing in itself according to all its inner determinations, I cannot let any one of them count as different from another if its whole concept is identical with it. But if it is an appearance in space, then it has its place not merely in the understanding (under concepts), but in sensible outer intuition (in space); and there physical places are completely indifferent in respect of the inner determinations of things, and a place = b can receive a thing that is completely similar and equal to another in place = a just as well as if it were ever so different from it internally. The difference of places already makes the multiplicity and distinction of objects {{{ 222 }}} as appearances, without further conditions, not only possible but also necessary in themselves. Thus that apparent law is no law of nature. It is merely an analytic rule for the comparison of things through mere concepts.

***Secondly***, the principle that realities (as mere affirmations) never logically oppose one another is a completely true proposition of the relation {{ 329 }} of concepts, but signifies not the least either in respect of nature or anywhere in respect of any thing in itself (of which we have no concept). For real opposition takes place everywhere where A-B=0, i.e., where one reality, connected with another in one subject, cancels the effect of the other, which all hindrances and counteractions in nature incessantly place before our eyes, and which nevertheless, since they rest on forces, must be called _realitates phaenomena_. General mechanics can even state the empirical condition of this opposition in a rule _a priori_, by looking to the opposition of directions: a condition of which the transcendental concept of reality knows nothing at all. Although Mr. von Leibniz did not announce this proposition with the pomp of a new principle, he nevertheless made use of it for new assertions, and his successors expressly incorporated it into their Leibniz-Wolffian system of doctrine. According to this principle, e.g., all evils are nothing but consequences of the limits of creatures, i.e., negations, because these are the only thing opposed to reality (in the mere concept of a thing in general it is indeed so, but not in things as appearances). Likewise, its adherents find it not only possible but also {{ 330 }} natural to unite all reality in one being without any anxiety about opposition, because they know no other opposition than that of contradiction (by which the concept of a thing itself is cancelled), but not that of mutual frustration, where one real ground cancels the effect of another, and the conditions for representing such an opposition to ourselves are found only in sensibility.

***Thirdly***, the Leibnizian monadology has no other ground at all than that this philosopher represented the difference of the inner and the outer merely in relation to the understanding. Substances {{{ 223 }}} in general must have something ***inner***, which is therefore free from all outer relations, and consequently also from composition. The simple is therefore the ground of the inner of things in themselves. But the inner of their state can also not consist in place, figure, contact, or motion (which determinations are all outer relations), and we can therefore assign to substances no other inner state than that through which we internally determine our own sense, namely, the ***state of representations***. Thus were the monads made ready, which are to constitute the basic material of the entire universe, but whose active power consists only in representations, through which they are properly active merely in themselves.

For this very reason, however, his principle of the possible ***community of substances*** with one another had to be a ***pre-established harmony*** and could not be a physical influence. For because everything is only inner, i.e., occupied with its representations, the state of representations of one substance could stand in absolutely no active connection with that of another, but some third cause, flowing into all of them together, had to make their states correspond to one another, and this indeed not through an occasional assistance applied particularly in each single case (_Systema assistentiae_), but through the unity of the idea of a cause valid for all, in which they must altogether obtain their existence and permanence, and consequently also their mutual correspondence with one another according to universal laws.

***Fourthly***, his celebrated ***doctrine*** of ***time*** and ***space***, in which he intellectualized these forms of sensibility, had arisen solely from the very same illusion of transcendental reflection. If I wish to represent outer relations of things to myself through the mere understanding, this can happen only by means of a concept of their reciprocal action, and if I am to connect one state of the very same thing with another state, this can happen only in the order of grounds and consequences. Thus Leibniz thought of space as a certain order in the community of substances, and time as the dynamical sequence of their states. {{ 332 }} But that which is peculiar and independent of things, which both seem to have in themselves, he ascribed to the ***confusion*** of these concepts, which caused that which is a mere form of dynamical relations {{{ 224 }}} to be taken for an intuition that is peculiar, self-subsisting, and preceding the things themselves. Thus space and time were the intelligible form of the connection of things (substances and their states) in themselves. But things were intelligible substances (_substantiae noumena_). Nevertheless, he wanted to make these concepts valid for appearances, because he did not concede to sensibility any proper kind of intuition, but sought all representations of objects, even empirical ones, in the understanding, leaving to the senses nothing but the contemptible business of confusing and distorting the representations of the former.

But even if we could say something synthetically ***of things in themselves*** through the pure understanding (which is nevertheless impossible), this could still not be related to appearances at all, which do not represent things in themselves. I shall therefore in this latter case always have to compare my concepts in transcendental reflection only under the conditions of sensibility, and thus space and time will be determinations not of things in themselves but of appearances: what things in themselves may be, I do {{ 333 }} not know, nor do I need to know, because a thing can never present itself to me otherwise than in appearance.

Thus I proceed also with the remaining concepts of reflection. Matter is _substantia phaenomenon_. What belongs to it internally I seek in all parts of the space that it occupies, and in all effects that it exerts, and which can indeed always be only appearances of outer senses. I have therefore indeed nothing that is absolutely inner, but only what is comparatively inner, which itself in turn consists of outer relations. But the absolutely inner of matter, according to the pure understanding, is also a mere whim; for matter is nowhere an object for the pure understanding; the transcendental object, however, which may be the ground of this appearance which we call matter, is a mere something, of which we would not even understand what it is, even if someone could tell us. For we can understand nothing except what brings with it in intuition something corresponding to our words. If the complaints: ***We do not at all see into the inner of things***, are to mean as much as: we do not comprehend through pure understanding what the things that appear to us may be in themselves, then they are entirely unjust and unreasonable; for they want us to be able to cognize, and consequently to intuit, things without {{{ 225 }}} senses, and thus that we should have a faculty of cognition entirely different from the human not merely in degree but even in intuition {{ 334 }} and kind, hence that we should be not humans but beings of whom we cannot even state whether they are possible, much less how they are constituted. Observation and analysis of appearances penetrate into the inner of nature, and one cannot know how far this will go in time. But those transcendental questions that go beyond nature we should nevertheless never be able to answer, even if the whole of nature were laid open to us, since it is not even given to us to observe our own mind with any other intuition than that of our inner sense. For in it lies the secret of the origin of our sensibility. Its relation to an object, and what the transcendental ground of this unity may be, lies without doubt too deeply hidden for us, who know even ourselves only through inner sense, and consequently as appearance, to be able to use so inappropriate an instrument of our investigation to discover anything other than always appearances in turn, the non-sensible cause of which we would nevertheless gladly explore.

What makes this critique of inferences from the mere actions of reflection exceedingly useful is: that it clearly demonstrates the nullity of all inferences about objects which one compares with one another merely in the understanding, {{ 335 }} and at the same time confirms what we have principally urged: that, although appearances are not included as things in themselves among the objects of the pure understanding, they are nevertheless the only ones in which our cognition can have objective reality, namely, where intuition corresponds to the concepts.

If we reflect merely logically, we simply compare our concepts with one another in the understanding, whether both contain the very same, whether they contradict one another or not, whether something is internally contained in the concept or is added to it, and which of the two is given, and which is to count only as a way of thinking the given. But if I apply these concepts to an object in general (in the transcendental sense), without determining it further as to whether it is an object of sensible or intellectual intuition, there immediately appear {{{ 226 }}} limitations (need to go beyond this concept), which pervert all empirical use of them and precisely thereby prove that the representation of an object as a thing in general is not merely ***insufficient***, but in itself, without sensible determination and independent of empirical condition, is ***contradictory***, so that one must either abstract from all objects (in logic) or, if one assumes one, think it under conditions of sensible intuition, and consequently the intelligible would require a completely special {{ 336 }} intuition, which we do not have, and in the absence of it is ***for us*** nothing, whereas on the other hand appearances also cannot be objects in themselves. For if I merely think things in general, then indeed the difference of outer relations cannot constitute a difference of the things themselves, but rather presupposes it, and if the concept of the one is internally not distinguished at all from that of the other, then I only place one and the same thing in different relations. Furthermore, by adding a mere affirmation (reality) to another, the positive is indeed increased and nothing is withdrawn from it or cancelled; hence the real in things in general cannot oppose one another, etc.

***

The concepts of reflection, as we have shown, have through a certain misinterpretation such an influence on the use of the understanding that they were capable of misleading even one of the most acute of all philosophers into a supposed system of intellectual cognition, which undertakes to determine its objects without the intervention of the senses. Precisely for this reason, the development of the deceptive cause of the amphiboly of these concepts as the occasion of false principles is of great utility in reliably determining and securing the boundaries of the understanding.

{{ 337 }} One must indeed say: what universally belongs to or contradicts a concept also belongs to or contradicts everything particular that is contained under that concept (_dictum de Omni et Nullo_); but it would be absurd to alter this logical principle so that it read: what is not contained in a general concept is also not contained in the particular ones that stand under it; for {{{ 227 }}} these are particular concepts precisely because they contain more in themselves than is thought in the general. Now upon this latter principle the entire intellectual system of Leibniz is indeed built; it therefore falls at the same time with it, together with all ambiguity in the use of the understanding arising therefrom.

The principle of the indiscernible was properly based on the assumption that if a certain distinction is not met with in the concept of a thing in general, then it is also not to be met with in the things themselves; consequently, all things are completely identical (_numero eadem_) which are not already distinguished from one another in their concept (as to quality or quantity). But because in the mere concept of any thing some necessary conditions of an intuition have been abstracted from, so by a strange haste that which is abstracted from is taken for something that is nowhere {{ 338 }} to be met with, and nothing is conceded to the thing except what is contained in its concept.

The concept of a cubic foot of space, let me think this where and as often as I will, is in itself completely identical. But two cubic feet are nevertheless in space distinguished merely by their places (_numero diversa_); these are conditions of intuition in which the object of this concept is given, which do not belong to the concept, but nevertheless belong to the whole of sensibility. In the same way, there is no opposition at all in the concept of a thing if nothing negative is combined with an affirmative, and merely affirmative concepts combined together can effect no cancellation at all. But in sensible intuition, in which reality (e.g., motion) is given, there are conditions (opposite directions), from which the concept of motion in general had abstracted, which make possible an opposition that is indeed not logical, namely, a zero = 0 from mere positives; and one could not say that therefore all reality is in agreement with one another because no opposition is met with among their concepts.[^*] {{{ 228 }}} {{ 339 }} According to mere concepts, the inner is the substratum of all relational or outer determinations. If I therefore abstract from all conditions of intuition and hold myself solely to the concept of a thing in general, then I can abstract from all outer relation, and there must nevertheless remain a concept of that which signifies no relation at all but merely inner determinations. Here, then, it seems to follow that in every thing (substance) there is something which is absolutely inner and precedes all outer determinations, by making them possible for the first time; consequently, this substratum is something that contains no outer relations in itself anymore, hence is ***simple*** (for corporeal things are indeed always only relations, at least of parts outside one another); and because we know no absolutely inner determinations other than those through our inner sense, so this substratum is not only simple, but also (according to the analogy with our inner sense) {{ 340 }} determined through ***representations***, i.e., all things would properly be ***monads***, or simple beings endowed with representations. All this would also be correct, did not something more than the concept of a thing in general belong to the conditions under which alone objects of outer intuition can be given to us, and from which the pure concept abstracts. For there it is shown that a permanent appearance in space (impenetrable extension) can contain mere relations and nothing at all absolutely inner, and yet be the first substratum of all outer perception. ***Through mere concepts***, i.e., of things in themselves, I can indeed think nothing outer without something inner, precisely because relational concepts nevertheless presuppose absolutely given things and are not possible without them. But since there is something contained in intuition that does not lie in the mere concept of a thing in general at all, and which yields the substratum that would not be cognized through mere concepts at all, namely, space, which with all that it contains consists of mere formal, or also real relations, I cannot say: because without an absolutely inner no thing can be represented through mere concepts, so also in the things themselves which are contained under these concepts, and in ***their*** {{{ 229 }}} ***intuition***, there is nothing outer that does not have something absolutely inner lying at its ground. For when we have abstracted from all conditions of intuition {{ 341 }}, there remains to us indeed in the mere concept nothing but the inner in general and its relation to one another, through which alone the outer is possible. This necessity, however, which is based solely on abstraction, does not take place in things insofar as they are given in intuition with such determinations as express mere relations, without having anything inner at their ground, because they are not things in themselves but merely appearances. What we know of matter are mere relations (what we call its inner determinations are only comparatively inner); but among these there are self-subsisting and permanent ones, through which a determined object is given to us. That when I abstract from these relations I have nothing further at all to think, does not cancel the concept of a thing as appearance, nor the concept of an object _in abstracto_, but indeed all possibility of such an object as is determinable according to mere concepts, i.e., of a noumenon. To be sure, it is startling to hear that a thing is to consist entirely of relations, but such a thing is also mere appearance and cannot be thought through pure categories at all; it itself consists in the mere relation of something in general to the senses. In the same way, if one begins with mere concepts, one can indeed not {{ 342 }} think the relations of things _in abstracto_ otherwise than that one is the cause of determinations in the other; for that is our concept of the understanding of relations themselves. But since we then abstract from all intuition, an entire way in which the manifold can determine its place for one another, namely, the form of sensibility (space), falls away, which nevertheless precedes all empirical causality.

If by merely intelligible objects we understand those things that are thought through pure categories without any schema of sensibility, then such things are impossible. For the condition of the objective use of all our concepts of the understanding is merely the mode of our sensible intuition, through which objects are given to us, and if we abstract from the latter, the former have no relation to any object at all. Indeed, even if one wished to assume another kind of intuition than this sensible one of ours, {{{ 230 }}} our functions of thinking would still be of no significance at all in respect of it. If we understand by them only objects of a non-sensible intuition, of which our categories indeed certainly do not hold, and of which we can therefore never have any cognition (neither intuition nor concept), then _Noumena_ in this merely negative significance must indeed be admitted: since they then say nothing other than that our mode of intuition does not go to all things, {{ 343 }} but merely to objects of our senses, consequently its objective validity is limited, and therefore room remains for some other kind of intuition and thus also for things as its objects. But then the concept of a _Noumenon_ is problematic, i.e., the representation of a thing of which we can say neither that it is possible nor that it is impossible, since we know no kind of intuition other than our sensible one and no kind of concepts other than the categories, neither of which, however, is appropriate to a non-sensible object. We can therefore not yet on that account positively extend the field of the objects of our thought beyond the conditions of our sensibility and, besides appearances, assume objects of pure thinking, i.e., Noumena, because they have no positive significance that can be stated. For one must admit of the categories: that they alone do not yet suffice for the cognition of things in themselves, and without the _data_ of sensibility would be merely subjective forms of the unity of the understanding, but without an object. To be sure, thinking in itself is no product of the senses, and to that extent is also not limited by them, but it is not on that account immediately of proper and pure use without the accession of sensibility, because it is then without an object. Nor can one call the Noumenon such an ***object***; for this signifies precisely the problematic {{ 344 }} concept of an object for an entirely different intuition and an entirely different understanding than ours, which is therefore itself a problem. The concept of the Noumenon is therefore not the concept of an object, but the problem, unavoidably connected with the limitation of our sensibility, whether there may not be objects entirely exempt from its intuition, which question can only be answered indeterminately, namely: that because sensible intuition does not go to all things without distinction, room remains for more and other objects, so they cannot be absolutely denied, but for want of a determined concept (since no category is {{{ 231 }}} fit for it) they can also not be asserted as objects for our understanding.

The understanding accordingly limits sensibility without thereby extending its own field, and by warning sensibility that it should not presume to go to things in themselves, but merely to appearances, it thinks an object in itself, but only as a transcendental object, which is the cause of appearance (consequently not itself appearance) and can, neither as magnitude, nor as reality, nor as substance, etc., be thought (because these concepts always require sensible forms in which they determine an object); of which, therefore, it is completely unknown whether it is to be met with in us or also outside us, and whether {{ 345 }} it would be cancelled together with sensibility, or would still remain if we took sensibility away. If we wish to call this object _Noumenon_ because the representation of it is not sensible, we are free to do so. But since we cannot apply any of our concepts of the understanding to it, this representation nevertheless remains empty for us and serves for nothing other than to designate the boundaries of our sensible cognition and to leave a space which we can fill neither through possible experience nor through the pure understanding.

The critique of this pure understanding therefore does not permit us to create a new field of objects other than those that can come before it as appearances, and to stray into intelligible worlds, or even into their concept. The error that misleads to this in the most deceptive way, and can indeed be excused although not justified, lies in this: that the use of the understanding, contrary to its destination, is made transcendental, and objects, i.e., possible intuitions, are made to conform to concepts, instead of concepts having to conform to possible intuitions (upon which alone their objective validity rests). But the cause of this, in turn, is: that apperception and with it thinking precede all possible determined ordering of representations. We therefore think something in general {{ 346 }} and determine it on the one hand sensibly, but nevertheless distinguish the general object represented _in abstracto_ from this way of intuiting it; there then remains to us a way of determining it merely through thinking, which is indeed a mere logical form without content, but nevertheless seems to us to be a way in which the object exists in itself {{{ 232 }}} (_Noumenon_), without regard to intuition, which is restricted to our senses.

***

Before we leave the transcendental Analytic, we must still add something which, although in itself of no particular importance, might nevertheless seem necessary for the completeness of the system. The highest concept from which one is accustomed to begin a transcendental philosophy is commonly the division into the possible and the impossible. But since all division presupposes a divided concept, a still higher one must be indicated, and this is the concept of an object in general (taken problematically, and left undecided whether it is something or nothing). Since the categories are the only concepts that relate to objects in general, the distinction of an object, as to whether it is something or nothing, will proceed according to the order and instruction of the categories.
+ 1) {{ 347 }} To the concepts of all, many, and one, that which cancels everything, i.e., ***none***, is opposed, and so the object of a concept to which no intuition that can be stated corresponds is nothing, i.e., a concept without an object, like the Noumena, which cannot be counted among the possibilities, although on that account they do not have to be declared impossible (_ens rationis_), or like certain new primary forces which one thinks of, which indeed are thought without contradiction, but also without example from experience, and thus do not have to be counted among the possibilities.
+ 2) Reality is ***something***, negation is ***nothing***, namely, a concept of the want of an object, like shadow or cold (_nihil privativum_).
+ 3) The mere form of intuition, without substance, is in itself no object, but the merely formal condition of the same (as appearance), like pure space and pure time, which are indeed something as forms for intuiting, but are themselves not objects that are intuited (_ens imaginarium_).
+ 4) The object of a concept that contradicts itself {{ 348 }} is nothing, because the concept is nothing, the impossible, like a rectilinear figure of two sides (_nihil negativum_).

{{{ 233 }}} The table of this division of the concept of ***nothing*** (for the corresponding division of something follows of itself) would therefore have to be arranged thus:

## Nothing, as

<figure style="display: grid; grid-template-columns: 1fr 1fr 1fr; grid-template-rows: auto auto auto; gap: 60px 20px; max-width: 800px; margin: 50px auto; text-align: center; padding: 40px;">
    <figcaption>Table of Nothing</figcaption>
    <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column; align-items: center; line-height: 1.3; grid-column: 2; grid-row: 1;">
        <span style="font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 4px;">1.</span>
        <span style="font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 4px;">Empty concept without object,</span>
        <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column;">
            <span><i>ens rationis.</i></span>
        </div>
    </div>
    <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column; align-items: center; line-height: 1.3; grid-column: 1; grid-row: 2; align-self: center;">
        <span style="font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 4px;">2.</span>
        <span style="font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 4px;">Empty object of a concept,</span>
        <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column;">
            <span><i>nihil privativum.</i></span>
        </div>
    </div>
    <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column; align-items: center; line-height: 1.3; grid-column: 3; grid-row: 2; align-self: center;">
        <span style="font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 4px;">3.</span>
        <span style="font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 4px;">Empty intuition without object,</span>
        <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column;">
            <span><i>ens imaginarium.</i></span>
        </div>
    </div>
    <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column; align-items: center; line-height: 1.3; grid-column: 2; grid-row: 3;">
        <span style="font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 4px;">4.</span>
        <span style="font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 4px;">Empty object without concept,</span>
        <div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column;">
            <span><i>nihil negativum</i>.</span>
        </div>
    </div>
</figure>

One sees that the object of thought (n. 1) is distinguished from the non-entity (n. 4) by the fact that the former must not be counted among possibilities because it is a mere fiction (though not contradictory), whereas the latter is opposed to possibility because the concept even cancels itself {{ 349 }}. Both are empty concepts. On the other hand, the _nihil privativum_ (n. 2) and _ens imaginarium_ (n. 3) are empty data for concepts. If light has not been given to the senses, one can represent to oneself no darkness, and if extended beings have not been perceived, one can represent to oneself no space. Both negation and the mere form of intuition are, without a real, no objects.

[^*]: If one wanted to make use here of the common subterfuge that at least _realitates noumena_ cannot counteract one another, one would nevertheless have to cite an example of such a pure and sense-free reality, so that one might understand whether such a reality represents anything at all or nothing. But no example can be taken from anywhere else than from experience, which never presents anything more than _Phaenomena_, and thus this proposition means nothing more than that the concept which contains mere affirmations contains nothing negative—a proposition of which we have never doubted.
