---
position: 55
label: "I. Of transcendental illusion"
depth: 5
aa_page: 234
---


## I. Of transcendental illusion

We have above called Dialectic in general a ***logic of illusion***. This does not mean that it is a doctrine of ***probability***; for this is truth, but cognized through insufficient grounds, the cognition of which is therefore indeed deficient, but for that reason not deceptive, and consequently does not have to be separated from the analytic part of logic. {{ 350 }} Even less may ***appearance*** and ***illusion*** be held to be one and the same. For truth or illusion are not in the object insofar as it is intuited, but in the judgment about it insofar as it is thought. One can therefore indeed correctly say that the senses do not err, but not because they always judge correctly, but because they do not judge at all. Therefore, truth as well as error, and consequently also illusion as the inducement to the latter, are only to be found in judgment, i.e., only in the relation of the object to our understanding. In a cognition that thoroughly agrees with the laws of the understanding, there is no error. In a representation of the senses (because it contains no judgment at all) there is also no error. But no force of nature can of itself deviate from its own laws. Hence, neither the understanding by itself (without the influence of another cause), nor the senses by themselves would err; the former not for this reason, because, if it acts merely according to its own laws, the effect (the judgment) must necessarily agree with these laws. But the formal element of all truth consists in agreement with the laws of the understanding. In the senses there is no judgment at all, neither a true nor a false one. Since we now have no other sources of cognition besides these two, it follows: {{{ 235 }}} that error is produced only through the unnoticed influence of sensibility on the understanding, whereby it happens that the subjective {{ 351 }} grounds of the judgment flow together with the objective ones and make the latter deviate from determination [^*]; just as a body in motion would indeed of itself always maintain a straight line in the same direction, which, however, if another force influences it at the same time in another direction, turns into a curvilinear motion. In order to distinguish the peculiar action of the understanding from the force which mingles with it, it will therefore be necessary to regard the erroneous judgment as the diagonal between two forces, which determine the judgment in two different directions that as it were enclose an angle, and to resolve that composite effect into the simple effect of the understanding and of sensibility; which in pure judgments _a priori_ must take place through transcendental reflection, whereby (as has already been shown) its place is assigned to every representation in the faculty of cognition appropriate to it, and consequently also the influence of the latter on the former is distinguished.

Our business here is not to treat of empirical illusion (e.g., the {{ 352 }} optical), which occurs in the empirical use of otherwise correct rules of the understanding, and by which the power of judgment is misled through the influence of the imagination; but we have to do solely with ***transcendental illusion***, which influences principles whose use is not even designed for experience—in which case we would at least have a touchstone of their correctness—but which instead, contrary to all the warnings of criticism, carries us entirely beyond the empirical use of the categories, and holds us in play with the deception of an extension of the ***pure understanding***. We will call those principles whose application keeps entirely within the limits of possible experience ***immanent***, but those which are intended to fly beyond these boundaries ***transcendent*** principles. But by these I do not understand the ***transcendental*** {{{ 236 }}} use or misuse of the categories, which is a mere mistake of the power of judgment when not properly curbed by criticism, which does not pay enough attention to the boundary of the ground where alone the pure understanding is permitted its play; but rather real principles that prompt us to tear down all those boundary posts and to arrogate to ourselves an entirely new ground that recognizes no demarcation anywhere. Therefore, ***transcendental*** and ***transcendent*** are not one and the same. The principles of pure understanding which we presented above are to be of merely {{ 353 }} empirical and not of transcendental, i.e., reaching beyond the boundary of experience, use. But a principle which does away with these limits, nay, even commands us to overstep them, is called ***transcendent***. If our criticism can succeed in exposing the illusion of these arrogated principles, then those principles of merely empirical use, in contrast to the latter, can be called ***immanent*** principles of the pure understanding.

Logical illusion, which consists in the mere imitation of the form of reason (the illusion of fallacious inferences), arises solely from a lack of attention to the logical rule. As soon, therefore, as this attention is sharpened upon the case before us, it completely vanishes. Transcendental illusion, on the contrary, does not likewise cease, even though it has already been exposed and its nullity clearly seen through transcendental criticism (e.g., the illusion in the proposition: the world must have a beginning in time). The cause of this is the following: that in our reason (regarded subjectively as a human faculty of cognition) there lie fundamental rules and maxims of its use, which have entirely the appearance of objective principles, and through which it happens that the subjective necessity of a certain connection of our concepts, in favor of the understanding, is held to be an objective necessity of the determination of things in themselves. An ***illusion*** {{ 354 }} which is not to be avoided at all, just as little as we can avoid the sea appearing higher to us in the middle than at the shore, because we see the former through higher light rays than the latter, or even more, just as little as the astronomer himself can prevent the moon from appearing larger to him when it rises, although he is not deceived by this illusion.

Transcendental Dialectic will therefore content itself with exposing the illusion of transcendent judgments, and at the same time preventing {{{ 237 }}} it from deceiving; but that it should also (like logical illusion) actually disappear and cease to be an illusion, is what Dialectic can never accomplish. For we have to do with a ***natural*** and unavoidable ***illusion***, which itself rests on subjective principles and substitutes them as objective, whereas logical dialectic, in resolving fallacious inferences, has to do only with a mistake in following principles, or with an artificial illusion in the imitation of them. There is, therefore, a natural and unavoidable dialectic of pure reason, not one in which a mere bungler might entangle himself through lack of knowledge, or which some sophist has artificially devised in order to confuse reasonable people, but one which irremediably cleaves to human reason, and even after we have exposed its deception, will still not cease to delude it {{ 355 }} and to thrust it incessantly into momentary aberrations that constantly require to be removed.

[^*]: Sensibility, placed under the understanding as the object to which the latter applies its function, is the source of real cognitions. But the very same sensibility, insofar as it influences the action of the understanding itself and determines it to judge, is the ground of error.
