---
position: 58
label: "Of the logical use of reason"
depth: 6
aa_page: 240
---


## {{{ 240 }}} B. Of the logical use of reason

A distinction is made between that which is immediately cognized, and that which is only inferred. That there are three angles in a figure bounded by three straight lines is immediately cognized; but that these angles together are equal to two right angles is only inferred. Because we are constantly in need of inferring, and thereby finally become completely accustomed to it, we at last no longer notice this distinction and often, as in the case of the so-called deception of the senses, take something to be immediately perceived which we have nevertheless only inferred. {{ 360 }} In every inference there is a proposition which lies at the foundation, and another, namely the conclusion, which is drawn from the former, and finally the consequence (consequence), according to which the truth of the latter is inevitably connected with the truth of the former. If the inferred judgment already lies in the first in such a way that it can be derived from it without the mediation of a third representation, then the inference is called immediate (_consequentia immediata_); I should prefer to call it an inference of the understanding. But if, besides the cognition laid at the foundation, another judgment is still necessary in order to effect the consequence, then the inference is called an inference of reason. In the proposition: ***all men are mortal***, there already lie the propositions: some men are mortal, some mortals are men, nothing that is immortal is a man, and these are therefore immediate consequences from the former. On the other hand, the proposition: all scholars are mortal, does not lie in the underlying judgment (for the concept of scholars does not occur in it at all), and it can be inferred from it only by means of an intermediate judgment.

In every inference of reason, ***I*** first think a ***rule*** (_major_) through the understanding. Secondly, ***I subsume*** a cognition under the condition of the rule (_minor_) by means of the ***power of judgment***. Finally, {{ 361 }} I determine my cognition through the predicate of the rule (_conclusio_), consequently _a priori_ through ***reason***. The relation, therefore, which the major premise as the rule represents between a cognition and its condition, constitutes the different kinds of inferences of reason. They {{{ 241 }}} are therefore exactly threefold, just as all judgments in general, insofar as they differ in the way they express the relation of cognition in the understanding, namely: ***categorical*** or ***hypothetical*** or ***disjunctive*** inferences of reason.

If, as for the most part happens, the conclusion is proposed as a judgment, in order to see whether it does not flow from already given judgments, through which, namely, an entirely different object is thought: then I search in the understanding for the assertion of this concluding proposition, to see whether it may not be found in the same, under certain conditions, according to a universal rule. If I now find such a condition, and if the object of the concluding proposition can be subsumed under the given condition, then this is inferred from the rule which ***also holds for other objects of cognition***. One sees from this: that reason, in inferring, seeks to bring the great manifold of the cognition of the understanding to the smallest number of principles (universal conditions), and thereby to effect the highest unity of the same.
