---
position: 58
label: "B. On the logical use of reason"
depth: 6
aa_page: 240
---


## {{{ 240 }}} B. On the logical use of reason

A distinction is made between that which is immediately cognized and that which is only inferred. That a figure bounded by three straight lines contains three angles is immediately cognized; but that these angles together amount to two right angles is only inferred. Since we have perpetual need of inference, and thereby become at last quite habituated to it, we finally cease to notice this distinction and often regard something as immediately perceived—as with the so-called deception of the senses—when in truth we have only inferred it. {{ 360 }} With every inference there is a proposition lying at its basis, and another, namely the conclusion drawn from the former, and lastly the inferential sequence (consequence) whereby the truth of the latter is unfailingly linked to the truth of the former. If the inferred judgment is already contained in the first one in such a manner that it may be drawn from it without any third representation intervening, then the inference is termed immediate (_consequentia immediata_); I should prefer to call it an inference of the understanding. But if, over and above the cognition placed at the ground, a further judgment is needed to produce the conclusion, then the inference is termed an inference of reason. In the proposition ***all human beings are mortal*** there already lie the propositions: some human beings are mortal, some mortal beings are human beings, nothing immortal is a human being, and these are accordingly immediate consequences of the first one. The proposition that all scholars are mortal, on the other hand, is not contained in the underlying judgment (for the concept of the scholar does not figure in it at all), and it can be derived from it only by way of an interposed judgment.

In every inference of reason ***I*** first, by means of the understanding, think a ***rule*** (_major_). Second, ***I subsume*** a cognition beneath the rule's condition (_minor_) with the help of the ***power of judgment***. Finally, {{ 361 }} I determine my cognition through the rule's predicate (_conclusio_), and thus _a priori_ through ***reason***. The relation, then, which the major premise, as the rule, represents between a cognition and its condition, makes up the various kinds of inferences of reason. They {{{ 241 }}} are on that account precisely threefold, just as all judgments in general are, insofar as they differ in the way in which they express the cognition's relation within the understanding, that is: ***categorical*** or ***hypothetical*** or ***disjunctive*** inferences of reason.

When, as for the most part happens, the conclusion has been set down as a judgment so as to see whether it does not follow from judgments already given—by which, that is, a wholly different object is thought—then I look in the understanding for the assertion of this concluding proposition, whether it may not be found there, under certain conditions, in accordance with a general rule. Should I then discover such a condition, and should the object of the concluding proposition admit of subsumption under the given condition, then this proposition stands inferred from the rule that ***holds also for other objects of cognition***. From this it is evident that reason, in its inferring, strives to reduce the vast manifold of the understanding's cognition to the fewest possible principles (general conditions), and by this means to produce their highest unity.
