---
position: 59
label: "C. Of the pure use of reason"
depth: 6
aa_page: 241
---

## {{ 362 }} C. Of the pure use of reason

Can reason be isolated, and is it then still a proper source of concepts and judgments which arise solely from it, and whereby it relates itself to objects; or is it a merely subordinate faculty of giving to given cognitions a certain form, which is called logical, and through which the cognitions of the understanding are only subordinated to one another, and lower rules to other, higher ones (the condition of which comprises the condition of the former in its sphere), as much as can be accomplished by the comparison of them? This is the question with which we are now only provisionally occupied. In fact, the manifoldness of rules and unity of principles is a demand of reason, in order to bring the understanding into thoroughgoing connection with itself, just as the understanding brings the manifold of intuition under concepts and thereby brings the latter into connection. But such a principle prescribes no law to objects, and does not contain the ground of the possibility of cognizing and determining them as such in general; but is merely a subjective law of economy with the store of our understanding, by comparison of its concepts to bring the {{{ 242 }}} general use of them to the smallest possible number of the same, without our being entitled on that account to demand from the objects themselves such an {{ 363 }} agreement as would promote the convenience and extension of our understanding, and at the same time to give objective validity to that maxim. In a word, the question is: whether reason in itself, i.e., pure reason _a priori_, contains synthetic principles and rules, and in what these principles may consist?

The formal and logical procedure of the same in syllogisms already gives us sufficient guidance on what ground its transcendental principle in synthetic cognition through pure reason will rest.

***Firstly***, the syllogism is directed not to intuitions, in order to bring them under rules (as the understanding does with its categories), but to concepts and judgments. If, therefore, pure reason is also directed to objects, it has nonetheless no immediate relation to them and their intuition, but only to the understanding and its judgments, which turn first to the senses and their intuition, in order to determine their object for them. Unity of reason is therefore not the unity of a possible experience, but is essentially distinguished from the latter as the unity of the understanding. That everything which happens has a cause, is by no means a principle recognized and prescribed by reason. It makes the unity of experience possible and borrows nothing {{ 364 }} from reason, which, without this relation to possible experience, could not, from mere concepts, have commanded any such synthetic unity.

***Secondly***, reason seeks in its logical use the universal condition of its judgment (the conclusion), and the syllogism is itself nothing other than a judgment by means of the subsumption of its condition under a universal rule (major premise). Since, now, this rule is in turn exposed to the very same attempt of reason, and thereby the condition of the condition (by means of a prosyllogism) must be sought as long as it is possible, one clearly sees that the peculiar principle of reason in general (in its logical use) is: to find for the conditioned cognition of the understanding the unconditioned, whereby its unity is completed.

{{{ 243 }}} This logical maxim, however, cannot become a principle of ***pure reason*** otherwise than by assuming that, if the conditioned is given, the whole series of mutually subordinated conditions, which is itself therefore unconditioned, is also given (i.e., contained in the object and its connection).

Such a principle of pure reason is, however, obviously ***synthetic***; for the conditioned relates analytically, to be sure, to some condition, but not to the unconditioned. There must also arise from it various {{ 365 }} synthetic propositions of which pure understanding knows nothing, as that which has to do only with objects of a possible experience, whose cognition and synthesis is at all times conditioned. But the unconditioned, if it actually takes place, can be considered particularly according to all the determinations that distinguish it from every conditioned, and must thereby afford material for many synthetic propositions _a priori_.

The principles arising from this supreme principle of pure reason will, however, be ***transcendent*** in respect of all appearances, i.e., no empirical use adequate to it will ever be able to be made of the same. It will therefore distinguish itself entirely from all principles of the understanding (the use of which is completely ***immanent***, since they have only the possibility of experience as their theme). Whether, now, that principle—that the series of conditions (in the synthesis of appearances, or even of the thinking of things in general) extends to the unconditioned—has its objective correctness or not; what consequences flow from it for the empirical use of the understanding, or whether there is rather no such objectively valid proposition of reason at all, but a merely logical prescription, by ascending to ever higher conditions, to approach the completeness of the same, and thereby to bring the highest unity of reason possible for us into our cognition; whether, I say, this need of reason has been mistaken through a {{ 366 }} misunderstanding for a transcendental principle of pure reason, which overhastily postulates such an unrestricted completeness of the series of conditions in the objects themselves; what misinterpretations and delusions, moreover, may in this case creep into those syllogisms whose major premise has been taken from pure reason (and which is perhaps more a petition than a postulate), and which ascend from experience upwards to their conditions: this will be our business in the transcendental dialectic {{{ 244 }}}, which we will now develop from its sources, which are deeply hidden in human reason. We shall divide it into two main parts, the ***first*** of which shall treat of the ***transcendent concepts*** of pure reason, the ***second*** of transcendent and ***dialectical syllogisms*** of the same.
