---
position: 60
label: "Book I. On the Concepts of Pure Reason"
depth: 4
aa_page: 244
---


## First Book. On the Concepts of Pure Reason

Whatever the situation may be with respect to the possibility of concepts drawn from pure reason: they are nonetheless not merely reflected but inferred concepts. Concepts of the understanding are likewise thought _a priori_, prior to {{ 367 }} experience and for the sake of it; yet they hold nothing further than the unity that reflection brings to the appearances, insofar as these must of necessity pertain to a possible empirical consciousness. It is through them alone that cognition and the determination of an object become possible. They are thus the first to furnish the material for inference, and they are preceded by no _a priori_ concepts of objects out of which they might be inferred. Their objective reality, by contrast, rests solely upon this: that, since they make up the intellectual form of all experience, their application must at all times be capable of being exhibited within experience.

The designation of a concept of reason, however, already indicates provisionally: that it will not allow itself to be confined within experience, because it concerns a cognition of which every empirical one is only a part (perhaps the whole of possible experience or of its empirical synthesis), a cognition to which no actual experience ever fully attains, yet to which such experience nonetheless at all times belongs. Concepts of reason serve the purpose of ***comprehending***, just as concepts of the understanding serve that of ***understanding*** (perceptions). Should they contain the unconditioned, then what they concern is something under which all experience falls, but which is itself never an object of experience: something toward which reason leads in its inferences from experience, and by which it estimates and {{ 368 }} {{{ 245 }}} gauges the degree of its empirical use, though it never forms a member of the empirical synthesis. Should such concepts, this notwithstanding, possess objective validity, they may be called _conceptus ratiocinati_ (correctly inferred concepts); if not, they are at least surreptitiously smuggled in through a semblance of inference and may be called _conceptus ratiocinantes_ (rationalizing concepts). Since, however, this can first be settled in the chapter on the dialectical inferences of pure reason, we cannot yet take it into account, but shall for the present—in the same way that we gave the pure concepts of the understanding the name of categories—bestow a new name upon the pure concepts of reason and term them transcendental ideas, while now elucidating and justifying this designation.
