---
position: 61
label: "Section 1. Of ideas in general"
depth: 5
aa_page: 245
---


## 1. Section. Of ideas in general

Amid the great richness of our languages, the thinking mind nevertheless often finds itself at a loss for an expression that exactly fits its concept, and in the absence of which it can make itself properly intelligible neither to others nor even to itself {{ 369 }}. To coin new words is an usurpation of legislative authority in languages which seldom succeeds, and before resorting to this desperate measure, it is advisable to look around in a dead and learned language to see whether this concept, together with its appropriate expression, is not to be found there; and even if its ancient use, through the carelessness of its originators, had become somewhat wavering, it is still better to secure the meaning which was preeminently proper to it (even if it should remain doubtful whether exactly the same meaning was then intended) than to ruin one's business merely by making oneself unintelligible.

For this reason, if there should happen to be only a single word for a certain concept which, in an already established meaning, exactly fits this concept, and the distinction of which from other related concepts is of great importance, it is advisable not to be prodigal with it, nor to use it synonymously merely for the sake of variety in place of others, but carefully to preserve for it its peculiar meaning {{{ 246 }}}; for otherwise it easily happens that, since the expression no longer particularly engages the attention but is lost among a crowd of other words of very different meaning, the thought itself is also lost which that expression alone could have preserved.

{{ 370 }} ***Plato*** employed the expression ***idea*** in such a way that one can see well that he understood by it something which not only is never borrowed from the senses, but which even far transcends the concepts of the understanding, with which ***Aristotle*** occupied himself, since nothing congruent with it is ever met with in experience. For him, ideas are archetypes of things themselves, and not merely keys to possible experiences, like the categories. According to his opinion, they flowed from the highest reason, whence they were imparted to human reason, which, however, is now no longer in its original state, but must with difficulty recall the old, now very obscured ideas through recollection (which is called philosophy). I do not wish to enter here into any literary investigation to determine the sense which the sublime philosopher attached to his expression. I only note that it is by no means unusual, both in common conversation and in writings, by comparing the thoughts which an author expresses on his subject, to understand him even better than he understood himself, since he did not sufficiently define his concept and thereby sometimes spoke or even thought contrary to his own intention.

Plato saw very well that our power of cognition feels a far higher need than merely to spell out appearances according to synthetic unity {{ 371 }} in order to be able to read them as experience, and that our reason naturally elevates itself to cognitions which go so far that no object which experience can provide can ever coincide with them, but which nonetheless have their reality and are by no means mere chimeras.

Plato found his ideas preeminently in everything that is practical,[^*] i.e., in what rests on freedom, which for its part stands under cognitions that are a {{{ 247 }}} peculiar product of reason. Whoever would derive the concepts of virtue from experience, whoever would make that which can at best serve as an example for an imperfect illustration into a pattern and source of cognition (as many have indeed done), would make of virtue an ambiguous nonentity, variable according to time and circumstances, and useless for any rule. On the contrary, everyone is aware that, {{ 372 }} when someone is presented to him as a pattern of virtue, he still always has the true original only in his own mind, with which he compares this alleged pattern and estimates it solely according to it. This, however, is the idea of virtue, in regard to which all possible objects of experience indeed serve as examples (proofs of the feasibility of that which the concept of reason demands, in a certain degree), but not as archetypes. That no human being will ever act adequately to what the pure idea of virtue contains does not at all prove that there is something chimerical in this thought. For all judgment concerning moral worth or unworth is nonetheless possible only by means of this idea; consequently, it necessarily lies at the foundation of every approach to moral perfection, however far the obstacles in human nature, the degree of which cannot be determined, may keep us from it.

The ***Platonic Republic*** has become a proverb as a supposedly striking example of dreamed-of perfection that can have its seat only in the brain of an idle thinker, and Brucker finds it ridiculous that the philosopher asserted that a prince would never govern well unless he partook of the ideas. But we should do better to follow up this thought more closely, and (where the excellent man leaves us without help) to bring it into {{ 373 }} light by new efforts, rather than to set it aside as useless under the very wretched and harmful pretext of its impracticability. A constitution of the ***greatest human freedom*** according to laws which permit the ***freedom of each to coexist with that of others*** (not of the greatest happiness, for this will follow of itself) is at least a necessary idea, which must be taken as the foundation not merely of the {{{ 248 }}} first draft of a state constitution, but also of all laws; and in this we must initially abstract from the present obstacles, which may perhaps arise not so much unavoidably from human nature as rather from the neglect of genuine ideas in legislation. For nothing can be found more harmful and more unworthy of a philosopher than the vulgar appeal to a supposedly conflicting experience, which would not exist at all if those institutions had been established at the right time in accordance with ideas, and if, in their stead, crude concepts had not thwarted every good intention, precisely because they were drawn from experience. The more the legislation and government were established in agreement with this idea, the rarer punishments would indeed become; and it is then quite reasonable (as Plato asserts) that under a perfect arrangement of the same, none of them would be necessary at all. Although the latter may never {{ 374 }} come to pass, the idea is nevertheless completely correct which sets up this maximum as an archetype, in order to bring the legal constitution of human beings ever closer to the greatest possible perfection. For what the highest degree may be at which mankind must stop, and how great, therefore, the gap which necessarily remains between the idea and its execution may be, is what no one can or should determine, precisely because it is freedom, which can transcend any specified limit.

But not only in that wherein human reason shows true causality, and where ideas become efficient causes (of actions and their objects), namely in morals, but also in regard to nature itself, Plato rightly sees clear proofs of its origin from ideas. A plant, an animal, the regular arrangement of the structure of the world (and presumably therefore also the entire order of nature) show clearly that they are possible only according to ideas; that although no individual creature, under the individual conditions of its existence, is congruent with the idea of the most perfect of its species (just as little as a human being is with the idea of humanity, which he nevertheless carries in his soul as the archetype of his actions), nevertheless these ideas are, in the highest understanding, individual, unchangeable, thoroughly determined, and the original causes of things, and only the whole of their connection {{ 375 }} in the universe is solely and completely adequate to that idea. If {{{ 249 }}} we set aside the exaggeration of his expression, the intellectual flight of the philosopher in ascending from the physical contemplation of the bodily aspect of the world-order to its architectonic connection according to purposes, i.e., according to ideas, is an effort that deserves respect and emulation; but in regard to what concerns the principles of morality, legislation, and religion, where ideas first make experience itself (of the good) possible, although they can never be fully expressed in it, his is a quite peculiar merit, which is not recognized only because it is judged by those very empirical rules whose validity as principles was precisely to be annulled by them. For in regard to nature, experience provides us with the rule and is the source of truth; but in regard to moral laws, experience is (alas!) the mother of illusion, and it is highly reprehensible to derive the laws of ***what I ought to do*** from, or to wish to limit them by, ***what is done***.

Instead of all these considerations, the proper execution of which indeed constitutes the peculiar dignity of philosophy, we are now occupied with a task that is not so brilliant, but yet not meritless {{ 376 }}, namely: to make the ground level and firm for those majestic moral edifices, in which there are all kinds of mole-tracks of a reason digging for treasures in vain but with confident hope, which make that building insecure. The transcendental use of pure reason, its principles and ideas, are therefore what it now behooves us to know precisely, in order to be able properly to determine and estimate the influence and value of pure reason. Yet, before I lay aside this preliminary introduction, I request those to whom philosophy is dear (which is saying more than is commonly met with), if they should find themselves convinced by this and what follows, to take the expression ***idea*** under their protection in its original meaning, so that it may not henceforth fall among the other expressions by which all kinds of modes of representation are commonly designated in careless disorder, and science lose thereby. For we do not lack terms that are properly suited to each mode of representation, without our needing to encroach on the property of another. Here is a graduated scale of them. The genus is ***representation*** in general (_repraesentatio_). {{{ 250 }}} Under it stands the representation with consciousness (_perceptio_). A ***perception*** which relates solely to the subject as the modification of its state is ***sensation*** (_sensatio_), an objective perception is {{ 377 }} ***cognition*** (_cognitio_). This is either ***intuition*** or ***concept*** (_intuitus vel conceptus_). The former relates immediately to the object and is singular; the latter mediately, by means of a characteristic mark which can be common to several things. A concept is either an ***empirical*** or a ***pure concept***; and the pure concept, insofar as it has its origin solely in the understanding (not in the pure image of sensibility), is called _notio_. A concept from notions, which transcends the possibility of experience, is the ***idea*** or the concept of reason. To anyone who has once accustomed himself to this distinction, it must be intolerable to hear the representation of the red color called an idea. It is not even to be called a notion (concept of the understanding).

[^*]: He extended his concept, to be sure, also to speculative cognitions, if only they were given purely and completely _a priori_, even over mathematics, although this has its object nowhere else than in ***possible*** experience. In this I cannot follow him, any more than in the mystical deduction of these ideas or the exaggerations by which he, as it were, hypostatized them, although the lofty language of which he availed himself in this field is quite capable of a milder interpretation, and one more suited to the nature of things.
