---
position: 63
label: "Section 3. System of transcendental ideas"
depth: 5
aa_page: 257
---


## {{ 390 }} Section 3. System of transcendental ideas

We have to do here not with a logical dialectic, which abstracts from all content of cognition and merely exposes the false illusion in the form of syllogisms, but with a transcendental one, which is to contain completely _a priori_ the origin of certain cognitions from pure reason and of inferred concepts, whose object cannot be given empirically at all, and which therefore lie entirely outside the capacity of the pure understanding. We have inferred from the natural relation that the transcendental use of our cognition must have to the logical use, both in syllogisms and in judgments, that there will be only three kinds of dialectical syllogisms, which refer to the three kinds of inference by which reason can arrive at cognitions from principles, and that in all of them its business is to ascend from the conditioned synthesis, to which the understanding always remains bound, to the unconditioned, which it can never reach.

Now the general aspect of all relations that our representations can {{ 391 }} have is: 1) the relation to the subject, 2) the relation to objects, and indeed either as appearances or as objects {{{ 258 }}} of thought in general. If one connects this subdivision with the upper division, then all relation of representations, of which we can make for ourselves either a concept or an idea, is threefold: 1. the relation to the subject, 2. to the manifold of the object in appearance, 3. to all things in general.

Now, all pure concepts in general have to do with the synthetic unity of representations, but concepts of pure reason (transcendental ideas) have to do with the unconditioned synthetic unity of all conditions in general. Consequently, all transcendental ideas will be capable of being brought under ***three classes***, of which the ***first*** contains the absolute (unconditioned) ***unity*** of the ***thinking subject***, the ***second*** the absolute ***unity*** of the ***series*** of the ***conditions of appearance***, and the ***third*** the absolute ***unity*** of the ***condition of all objects of thought in general***.

The thinking subject is the object of ***psychology***, the sum total of all appearances (the world) is the object of ***cosmology***, and the thing which contains the supreme condition of the possibility of everything that can be thought (the being of all beings) is the object of ***theology***. Thus pure reason provides the idea for a transcendental doctrine of the soul (_psychologia rationalis_), for a transcendental {{ 392 }} science of the world (_cosmologia rationalis_), and finally also for a transcendental cognition of God (_theologia transscendentalis_). Even the mere projection of the one as well as of the other of these sciences does not originate from the understanding at all, even if it were connected with the highest logical use of reason, i.e., with all conceivable syllogisms, in order to proceed from an object of the same (appearance) to all others up to the most remote members of the empirical synthesis, but is instead merely a pure and genuine product or problem of pure reason.

What kind of _modi_ of the pure concepts of reason stand under these three titles of all transcendental ideas will be fully set forth in the following chapter. They proceed along the thread of the categories. For pure reason never relates directly to objects, but to the concepts of the understanding of them. In the same way, it can be made clear only in its complete execution how reason, merely through the synthetic use of the very same function of which it avails itself for the categorical syllogism, must of necessity {{{ 259 }}} arrive at the concept of the absolute unity of the ***thinking subject***; how the logical procedure in hypothetical ones must carry with it the idea of the absolutely unconditioned ***in a series*** of given conditions; and, finally, how the {{ 393 }} mere form of the disjunctive syllogism must of necessity carry with it the highest concept of reason, that of a ***being of all beings***: a thought which at first sight seems extremely paradoxical.

Of these transcendental ideas, no ***objective deduction*** is really possible, such as we were able to provide for the categories. For in fact they have no relation to any object that could be given as congruent to them, for the very reason that they are only ideas. But we were able to undertake a subjective derivation of them from the nature of our reason; and this has also been accomplished in the present chapter.

One easily sees that pure reason has no other aim than the absolute totality of the synthesis ***on the side of the conditions*** (be it of inherence or of dependence or of concurrence), and that it has nothing to do with the absolute completeness ***on the side of the conditioned***. For it requires the former alone in order to presuppose the entire series of conditions and thereby to give it to the understanding _a priori_. But once a completely (and unconditionally) given condition is present, there is no longer any need for a concept of reason in respect of the continuation of the series; for the understanding of itself takes every step {{ 394 }} downward from the condition to the ***conditioned***. In this way, transcendental ideas serve only for ***ascending*** in the series of conditions up to the unconditioned, i.e., to principles. In respect of ***descending*** to the conditioned, however, there is indeed a far-reaching logical use that our reason makes of the laws of the understanding, but no transcendental use at all; and if we make for ourselves an idea of the absolute totality of such a synthesis (of the _progressus_), e.g., of the entire series of all ***future*** alterations of the world, then this is a thing of thought (_ens rationis_) which is only arbitrarily thought and is not necessarily presupposed by reason. For, although the totality of its conditions is presupposed for the possibility of the conditioned, the totality of its consequences is not. Consequently, such a concept is not a transcendental idea, which, however, is solely what we have to do with here.

{{{ 260 }}} Finally, one also becomes aware of this: that a certain connection and unity shine forth among the transcendental ideas themselves, and that pure reason, by means of them, brings all its cognitions into a system. To proceed from the cognition of oneself (the soul) to the cognition of the world, and by means of this to the original being, is so natural a progress that it seems similar to the logical progress of reason from {{ 395 }} premises to the conclusion [^*]. Whether a relationship of the kind that exists between logical and transcendental procedure actually lies secretly at the basis here is also one of the questions whose answer must first be expected in the course of these investigations. We have already achieved our purpose for the time being, {{ 396 }} since we have been able to extract from this ambiguous position the transcendental concepts of reason, which are otherwise commonly mixed with others in the theories of philosophers without the latter even properly distinguishing them from concepts of the understanding, to indicate their origin and thereby at the same time their determinate number, beyond which there can be no more, and to present them in a systematic connection, whereby a special field is marked out and restricted for pure reason.

[^*]: Metaphysics has for the proper end of its inquiry only three ideas: ***God***, ***freedom and immortality***, so that the second concept, combined with the first, is to lead to the third as a necessary conclusion. Everything with which this science otherwise occupies itself serves merely as a means to arrive at these ideas and their reality. It does not need them for the sake of natural science, but in order to pass beyond nature. Insight into them would make ***theology, morals***, and, through the combination of both, ***religion***, and thus the highest ends of our existence, dependent solely on the speculative power of reason and on nothing else. In a systematic presentation of those ideas, the order mentioned, as the ***synthetic***, would be the most appropriate; but in the treatment which must of necessity precede it, the ***analytic***, which reverses this order, will be more suitable to the purpose, in order that, by proceeding from what experience immediately provides to us—from the ***doctrine of the soul*** to the ***doctrine of the world***, and from there to the cognition of ***God***—we may complete our great design.
