---
position: 64
label: "Book II. Of the Dialectical Inferences of Pure Reason"
depth: 4
aa_page: 261
---


## {{{ 261 }}} Book II. Of the Dialectical Inferences of Pure Reason

One can say that the object of a mere transcendental idea is something of which one has no concept, although this idea has been produced quite necessarily in reason according to its original laws. For in fact, of an object which is to be adequate to the demand of reason, no concept of the understanding is possible, i.e., one which can be shown and made intuitive in a possible experience. Yet one would express oneself better, and with less {{ 397 }} danger of misunderstanding, if one said: that we can have no cognition, although a problematic concept, of the object which corresponds to an idea.

Now, at least the transcendental (subjective) reality of the pure concepts of reason rests on this, that we are led to such ideas by a necessary inference of reason. Thus there will be inferences of reason which contain no empirical premises, and by means of which we infer from something that we know to something else of which we nevertheless have no concept, and to which we nonetheless give objective reality through an unavoidable illusion. Such inferences are therefore, in respect of their result, rather to be called ***ratiocinating*** than inferences of reason: although, on account of their occasion, they may well bear the latter name, since they have not arisen fictitiously or accidentally, but have sprung from the nature of reason. They are sophistications not of men, but of pure reason itself, from which even the wisest of all men cannot free himself, and though perhaps after much effort he may prevent the error, yet he can never completely get rid of the illusion, which incessantly teases and mocks him.

There are therefore only three kinds of these dialectical inferences of reason, as numerous as the ideas in which their conclusions terminate. In the inference of reason of the **first class**, I infer from the transcendental {{ 398 }} concept of the subject, which contains nothing manifold, to the absolute unity of this subject itself, of which in this way I have no {{{ 262 }}} concept at all. This dialectical inference I shall call the transcendental ***paralogism***. The **second** class of ratiocinating inferences is directed toward the transcendental concept of the absolute totality of the series of conditions for a given appearance in general; and I infer therefrom—since I always have a self-contradictory concept of the unconditioned synthetic unity of the series on one side—the correctness of the opposite unity, of which I nevertheless also have no concept. The state of reason in these dialectical inferences I shall call the ***antinomy*** of pure reason. Finally, according to the **third** kind of ratiocinating inferences, I infer from the totality of conditions for thinking objects in general, insofar as they can be given to me, to the absolute synthetic unity of all conditions of the possibility of things in general, that is, from things which I do not know according to their mere transcendental concept, to a being of all beings, which I know even less through a transcendental concept, and of whose unconditioned necessity I can form no concept. This dialectical inference of reason I shall call the ***ideal*** of pure reason.
