---
position: 64
label: "Book II. On the Dialectical Inferences of Pure Reason"
depth: 4
aa_page: 261
---


## {{{ 261 }}} Second Book. On the Dialectical Inferences of Pure Reason

One may say that a merely transcendental idea has for its object something for which one possesses no concept, even though this idea is produced quite necessarily within reason in accordance with its original laws. For, in truth, an object that is supposed to correspond to reason's requirement likewise admits of no concept of the understanding — that is, of a concept that can be displayed and rendered intuitable within a possible experience. One would, however, express the matter better, and with less {{ 397 }} risk of being misunderstood, were one to say: that of the object which corresponds to an idea we can have no acquaintance, although we can indeed have a problematic concept of it.

Now the transcendental (subjective) reality of the pure concepts of reason rests at least upon the fact that a necessary inference of reason brings us to such ideas. There will accordingly be inferences of reason that contain no empirical premises and by means of which, from something we know, we draw a conclusion to something else of which we have no concept, yet to which, through an inevitable illusion, we grant objective reality. With respect to their outcome, such inferences are therefore to be termed ***ratiocinating*** rather than inferences of reason: although, on account of what occasions them, they may indeed carry the latter title, since they are neither invented nor arisen by chance but issue from the very nature of reason itself. They are sophistications that belong not to human beings but to pure reason itself, from which not even the wisest of all human beings can free himself, and though after much labor he may perhaps guard against the error, the illusion that unceasingly pinches and mocks him he can never entirely shake off.

Of these dialectical inferences of reason, then, there are only three sorts, precisely as many kinds as there are ideas onto which their concluding propositions issue. In the inference of reason of the **first class** I conclude, from the transcendental {{ 398 }} concept of the subject, which contains nothing manifold, to the absolute unity of this subject itself, of which in this way I have utterly no {{{ 262 }}} concept. This dialectical inference I shall call the transcendental ***paralogism***. The **second** class of ratiocinating inferences is laid out upon the transcendental concept of the series of conditions, in its absolute totality, for a given appearance as such; and from this — that on the one side I invariably possess a self-contradictory concept of the series' unconditioned synthetic unity — I conclude to the correctness of the opposing unity, of which I nonetheless likewise have no concept. The state of reason in these dialectical inferences I shall call the ***antinomy*** of pure reason. Finally, in accordance with the **third** kind of ratiocinating inference, I conclude, from the totality of the conditions for thinking objects as such, so far as they may be given to me, to the absolute synthetic unity of all conditions of the possibility of things as such — that is, from things that I do not know through their mere transcendental concept, to a being of all beings, which I know even less through a transcendental concept, and of whose unconditioned necessity I am unable to form any concept. This dialectical inference of reason I shall call the ***ideal*** of pure reason.
