---
position: 70
label: "First Antinomy"
depth: 7
aa_page: 294
---

## {{{ 294 }}} {{ 454 }} The Antinomy of Pure Reason

## First Conflict of the Transcendental Ideas.

## Thesis.

The world has a beginning in time, and is also enclosed in boundaries as regards space.

## Proof.

For let us assume that the world has no beginning in time: then up to every given point in time an eternity has elapsed, and consequently an infinite series of successive states of things in the world has passed away. Now the infinity of a series, however, consists in this: that it can never be completed through successive synthesis. Therefore an infinite elapsed world-series is impossible, and consequently a beginning of the world is a necessary condition of its existence; which was the first thing to be proved.

With respect to the ***second***, let us again assume the opposite: then the world will be an infinite given whole of coexisting things. Now we can think the magnitude of a _quantum_ that is not given within certain boundaries of every intuition [^*] {{ 456 }} in no other way than through the synthesis of the parts, and the totality of such a _quantum_ only through the completed synthesis, or through the repeated addition of unity to itself.[^**] Accordingly, in order to think the world, which fills all spaces, as a whole, the successive synthesis of the parts of an infinite world would have to be regarded as completed, i.e., an infinite time would have to be regarded as having elapsed in the enumeration of all coexisting things; which is impossible. Accordingly, an infinite aggregate of actual things cannot be regarded as a given whole, and therefore also not as ***simultaneously given***. A world is consequently, as regards its extension in space, ***not infinite***, but enclosed within its boundaries; which was the second thing.

## {{{ 295 }}} {{ 455 }} Antithesis.

The world has no beginning, and no boundaries in space, but is infinite both as regards time and space.

## Proof.

For let us assume: it has a beginning. Since the beginning is an existence which is preceded by a time in which the thing is not, a time must have preceded in which the world was not, i.e., an empty time. But in an empty time, no arising of any thing is possible: because no part of such a time has in itself, prior to another, any distinguishing condition of existence rather than that of non-existence (whether one assumes that it arises of itself or through another cause). Therefore, although many a series of things can begin in the world, the world itself can have no beginning, and is thus infinite with respect to past time.

As regards the second, let us first assume the opposite, namely that the world is finite and bounded as regards space: then it finds itself in an empty space which is not bounded. There would therefore be encountered not only a relation of things in ***space***, but also of things ***to space***. Since now the world is an absolute whole, {{ 457 }} outside of which no object of intuition and consequently no _correlatum_ of the world is encountered with which the same stands in relation {{{ 297 }}}, the relation of the world to empty space would be a relation of the same ***to no object***. Such a ***relation***, however, and consequently also the limitation of the world by empty space, is nothing; therefore the world is not bounded at all as regards space, i.e., it is infinite in respect of extension.[^***]

## {{ 458 }} Remark on the First Antinomy.

## I. On the Thesis.

I have not sought after illusions in these conflicting arguments in order to conduct, as they say, a lawyer's proof, which makes use of the opponent's carelessness for its own advantage and willingly accepts his appeal to a misunderstood law in order to build its own unlawful claims upon the refutation of the same. Each of these proofs has been drawn from the nature of the case, and any advantage has been set aside that we could have derived from the fallacies of the dogmatists of both parties.

I could also have seemingly proved the thesis by premising a faulty concept of the infinity of a given magnitude, in accordance with the custom of the dogmatists. ***Infinite*** is a magnitude greater than which no other (that is, greater than the multiplicity of a given unit contained therein) is possible. Now no multiplicity is the greatest, because one or more units can always still be added. Therefore an infinite given magnitude, and consequently also a world that is infinite (both as regards the elapsed series and as regards its extension) is {{{ 298 }}} impossible; it is therefore bounded on both sides. Thus I could have conducted my proof: yet this concept does not agree with what is understood by an infinite whole. By this it is not represented how large it is, and consequently its concept is also not the concept of a maximum, {{ 460 }} but rather by it is thought only its relation to an arbitrarily assumed unit, with respect to which it is greater than any number. According as the unit is assumed to be larger or smaller, the infinite would be larger or smaller; yet the infinity, since it consists merely in the relation to this given unit, would always remain the same, although to be sure the absolute magnitude of the whole would thereby not be recognized at all, of which, however, there is no question here.

The true (transcendental) concept of infinity is: that the successive synthesis of unity in the measuring of a _quantum_ can never be completed.[^****] From this it follows with complete certainty that an eternity of actual successive states cannot have elapsed up to any given (the present) point in time, and that the world must therefore have a beginning.

With respect to the second part of the thesis, the difficulty of an infinite and yet elapsed series indeed disappears; for the manifold of a world that is infinite in extension is given ***simultaneously***. But in order to think the totality of such a multitude, since we cannot appeal to boundaries which of themselves constitute this totality in intuition, we must give an account {{{ 300 }}} of our concept, which in such a case cannot go from the whole to the determined multitude of the parts, but must demonstrate the possibility of a whole through the successive synthesis of the parts. Since this synthesis must now constitute a series that is never to be completed, one can never think a totality before it, and consequently also not through it. For the concept of totality itself is in this case the representation of a completed synthesis of the parts, and this completion, and consequently also the concept of it, is impossible.

## {{ 459 }} II. On the Antithesis.

The proof for the infinity of the given world-series and of the world-sum rests on this: that in the opposite case an empty time, and likewise an empty space, would have to constitute the boundary of the world. Now it is not unknown to me that evasions are sought against this consequence, by pretending that a boundary of the world as regards time and space is quite possible without one having to assume an absolute time before the beginning of the world, or an absolute space extended outside the actual world; which is impossible. I am quite well satisfied with the latter part of this opinion of the philosophers of the Leibnizian {{{ 299 }}} school. Space is merely the form of outer intuition, but not an actual object that can be outwardly intuited, and not a _correlatum_ of appearances, but the form of the appearances themselves. Space therefore cannot occur absolutely (by itself) as something determining in the existence of things, because it is not an object at all, but only the form of possible objects. Things therefore, as appearances, indeed determine space, i.e., among all possible predicates of it (magnitude and relation) they make it so that this or that predicate belongs to reality; but conversely, space, as something which exists by itself, cannot determine the reality of things as regards magnitude or shape, because it is in itself nothing actual. Space can therefore indeed be bounded by appearances (whether it be full or empty),[^*****] {{ 461 }} but appearances cannot be bounded ***by an empty space*** outside of them. The very same also holds true of time. All this now being admitted, it is nevertheless indisputable that one would have to assume entirely these two non-entities, namely empty space outside and empty time before the world, if one assumes a world-boundary, whether as regards space or as regards time.

For as regards the evasion by which one seeks to escape the consequence according to which we say that, if the world has boundaries (as regards time and space), the infinite void must determine the existence of actual things as regards their magnitude, it consists secretly only in this: that instead of a ***sensible world*** one thinks of who knows what intelligible world, and instead of a first beginning (an existence preceded by a time of non-existence) one thinks of an existence in general which ***presupposes no other condition in the world***, and instead of the boundary of extension one thinks of the ***limits*** of the world-whole, and thereby gets out of the way of time and space. But here we are speaking only of the _mundus phaenomenon_ and of its magnitude, in which one can by no means abstract from the thought conditions of sensibility without abolishing its essence. The ***sensible world***, if it is bounded {{{ 301 }}}, lies necessarily in the infinite void. If one wishes to omit this, and consequently space in general as an _a priori_ condition of the possibility of appearances, then the entire ***sensible world*** falls away. In our task, this alone is given to us. The _mundus intelligibilis_ is nothing but the general concept of a world in general, in which one abstracts from all conditions of its intuition, and in respect of which consequently no synthetic proposition, whether affirmative or negative, is possible.

[^*]: We can intuit an indeterminate _quantum_ as a whole if it is enclosed within boundaries, without having to construct the totality of it through measurement, i.e., the successive synthesis of its parts. For the boundaries already determine the completeness by cutting off everything further.

[^**]: The concept of totality is in this case nothing other than the representation of the completed synthesis of its parts, because, since we cannot draw the concept from the intuition of the whole (which in this case is impossible), we can grasp it only through the synthesis of the parts up to the completion of the infinite, at least in the idea.

[^***]: Space is merely the form of outer intuition (formal intuition), but not an actual object that can be outwardly intuited. Space prior to all things which determine (fill or limit) it, or which rather give an ***empirical intuition*** conforming to its form, is under the name of absolute space nothing other than the mere possibility of outer appearances, in so far as they either exist in themselves or can yet be added to given appearances. The ***empirical intuition*** is therefore not composed of appearances and space (perception and empty intuition). The one is not the other's _correlatum_ of synthesis, but they are rather bound together in one and the same empirical intuition, as matter and form of the same. If one wants to place one of these two parts outside the other (space outside of all appearances), there arise from this all kinds of empty determinations of outer intuition which are yet not possible perceptions: e.g., motion or rest of the world in the infinite empty space, a determination of the relation of both to one another which can never be perceived, and is therefore also the predicate of a mere entity of thought.

[^****]: This thereby contains a multiplicity (of a given unit) that is greater than any number, which is the mathematical concept of the infinite.

[^*****]: One easily notes that by this it is meant to be said: ***empty space, in so far as it is bounded by appearances***, consequently that ***within the world***, does not at least contradict transcendental principles, and can therefore be conceded in respect of these (although its possibility is not thereby immediately asserted).
