---
position: 86
label: "Explanation of the cosmological idea of freedom in connection with universal natural necessity"
depth: 8
aa_page: 368
---

## {{ 570 }} Explanation of the cosmological idea of freedom in connection with universal natural necessity.

It has seemed to me advisable to trace first, in bare outline, the manner in which our transcendental problem admits of solution, so that the course reason follows in solving it may be surveyed with greater ease. We shall now set out the several moments of reason's verdict—the points on which the matter genuinely hinges—and take each of them under separate consideration.

The law of nature—that whatever occurs has its cause; that the causality of this cause, namely the ***action***, inasmuch as it goes before in time and, with regard to an effect that has ***arisen***, cannot itself have existed at all times but must rather have ***happened***, in turn has its own cause among the appearances by which it is determined; and that accordingly every event within an order of nature is empirically determined: this law, whereby appearances are first made into a ***nature*** at all and become capable of furnishing objects for an experience, is a law of the understanding which on no pretext may be forsaken, nor may any appearance be withdrawn from its scope; for one would thereby remove that appearance beyond all possible experience, distinguishing it in that very act from every object of possible experience {{ 571 }}, and turning it into a bare entity of thought and a figment of the imagination.

{{{ 369 }}} Although at this point everything appears to rest upon nothing but a chain of causes that, in the regress toward its conditions, tolerates no ***absolute totality*** at all, this misgiving in no way holds us up; for it was already removed in the general appraisal of reason's antinomy, at the point where reason, within the series of appearances, sets out after the unconditioned. Should we consent to the deception of transcendental realism, then nothing remains—neither nature nor freedom. The sole question at issue here is this: supposing that one recognizes, across the whole series of all events, pure natural necessity alone, whether it is still possible to view one and the very same event—which on one side is nothing but an effect of nature—as being, on the other side, an effect arising out of freedom; or whether, between these two sorts of causality, an outright contradiction is encountered.

Certainly, nothing can be found among the causes in appearance capable of initiating a series absolutely and out of itself. Any action, taken as appearance, in so far as it gives rise to an event, is itself an event or occurrence presupposing a prior state wherein its cause resides; and thus whatever happens is but a prolonging of the series, so that no self-originating beginning is possible within it. {{ 572 }} All actions of natural causes in the succession of time are, therefore, themselves once more effects, which no less presuppose their own causes within the temporal series. An ***original*** action—one by which something comes to pass that formerly was not—is not to be looked for in the causal nexus of appearances.

But is it truly necessary that, when the effects are appearances, the causality of their cause—the cause, that is, being itself likewise appearance—should be nothing but empirical? And is it not, on the contrary, possible that, even though for each effect in appearance a linkage with its cause under laws of empirical causality is unquestionably demanded, this empirical causality might nonetheless, without disturbing in the slightest its connection with the causes of nature, be the effect of a causality that is not empirical but intelligible? that is, the effect of an action original in regard to appearances, belonging to a cause which to that extent is thus not appearance but, in respect of this power, intelligible, granted that in every other respect it must, as one member of nature's chain, be reckoned along with the world of sense.

The principle of the causality of appearances among themselves is indispensable to us if we are to be able to look for, and to assign, natural conditions—causes, that is, in {{{ 370 }}} appearance—for natural events. If this is conceded and undermined by no exception, then the understanding—{{ 573 }} which, in its empirical employment, discerns nothing but nature in every event and is fully within its rights to do so—holds everything it is able to require, and physical explanations pursue their unobstructed course. Now no harm whatever is done to it—even granting that the supposition should be a mere invention besides—by assuming that among the causes of nature there are likewise some endowed with a power that is intelligible alone, seeing that what determines this power to act reposes never on empirical conditions but purely on grounds of the understanding, yet in such fashion that the ***action in the appearance*** proceeding from this cause conforms to every law of empirical causality. For on this footing the agent, as _causa phaenomenon_, would be linked to nature in an inseverable dependence of all its acts, and only the _phaenomenon_ of this subject (with all the causality it exhibits in appearance) would carry certain conditions that, should one wish to climb from the empirical object up to the transcendental one, would have to be taken as merely intelligible. For so long as, in whatever may serve as cause among the appearances, we do but keep to the rule of nature, we may stay untroubled as to what ground for these appearances and their interconnection is being conceived within the transcendental subject, which remains empirically unknown to us. That intelligible ground does not so much as touch the empirical questions; it has to do, perhaps, merely with the thinking carried on in pure understanding; and though {{ 574 }} the effects of such thinking and acting of pure understanding do turn up in the appearances, these must all the same admit of being explained completely, from their cause in appearance, according to laws of nature—one taking their merely empirical character for the highest ground of explanation, and passing over altogether, as something unknown, the intelligible character that forms the transcendental cause of the former, save in so far as it is exhibited through the empirical character alone, as the sensible sign of it. Let this be brought to bear upon experience. The human being belongs among the appearances of the sensible world, and so far he is likewise one of the causes of nature, whose causality has to stand beneath empirical laws. Being such a cause, he must, accordingly, carry an empirical character too, as do all other things of nature. We take note of it by way of the forces and powers that he manifests in his effects. In the case of {{{ 371 }}} nature that is lifeless, or merely animal in its animation, we come upon no reason to conceive any power otherwise than as conditioned in a purely sensible way. The human being alone, however, who is otherwise acquainted with the whole of nature through the senses only, has cognizance of himself also through bare apperception—and that, moreover, in actions and inner determinations which he can by no means class among the impressions of sense—and is, to be sure, to himself in one part a phenomenon, but in another part, namely with respect to certain powers, an object that is merely intelligible, since the activity of this being cannot be reckoned to the receptivity of sensibility {{ 575 }} in any way. These powers we name understanding and reason; the latter above all is marked off, in the fullest and most distinctive manner, from every empirically conditioned power, in that it ponders its objects solely in the light of ideas and thereupon determines the understanding, which then proceeds to make an empirical use of its concepts (pure though these also are).

That this reason does possess causality—or, at the least, that we picture to ourselves some such causality in it—is evident from the ***imperatives*** that, throughout the whole practical sphere, we lay down as rules for the powers that carry them out. The ***ought*** gives voice to a species of necessity and of connection with grounds such as is met with nowhere else in the whole of nature. Concerning nature, the understanding is able to cognize only ***what there is***, or what has been, or what will be. That anything therein ***ought to be*** otherwise than, in all these relations of time, it actually is, is impossible; indeed, the ***ought***, if one has nothing but the course of nature in view, is wholly without any meaning at all. It is not open to us to ask what in nature ought to take place—no more than to ask what properties a circle ought to bear—but only what does take place therein, or what properties the latter actually possesses.

This ought, then, gives expression to a possible action, the ground of which is nothing beyond a mere concept, whereas with a merely natural action the ground must invariably be an appearance. {{ 576 }} Granted, the action has indeed to be possible under conditions of nature if the ought is aimed at it; those natural conditions, however, bear not upon the determining of the free choice itself, but only upon the effect and issue of that choice in appearance. Let there be ever so many grounds in nature spurring me to ***willing***, ever so many sensible enticements, still they cannot beget the ***ought***, but only a willing that is as yet far from necessary and is throughout conditioned, against which the ought pronounced by reason sets up measure and aim—nay, prohibition {{{ 372 }}} and authority. Be the object one of mere sensibility (the agreeable) or else of pure reason (the good): reason does not defer to the ground that is given empirically, nor does it comply with the order of things as these display themselves in appearance; rather, in complete spontaneity it frames for itself an order of its own after ideas, into which it accommodates the empirical conditions, and by which it goes so far as to pronounce necessary even actions that ***have not happened*** and will perhaps never happen—assuming, all the while, of every one of them that reason is able to have causality in respect of it; for otherwise it would not look for effects of its ideas within experience.

Let us come to a stand at this point and grant, at least as a possibility {{ 577 }}, that reason genuinely has causality in respect of the appearances: then, however much it is reason all the same, it must yet exhibit an empirical character of its own, for a cause always presupposes a rule whereby certain appearances ensue as its effects, and every rule calls for a uniformity in those effects—a uniformity founding the concept of the cause (taken as a power)—which concept, in so far as it has to become manifest out of mere appearances, we may term its empirical character, a character that abides constant, while the effects, according to the diversity of the attendant and in part restricting conditions, present themselves in shifting shapes.

Every human being, accordingly, has an empirical character of his free choice, and this is nothing but a certain causality of his reason, in so far as that reason exhibits, in its effects within appearance, a rule by which the grounds of reason and their actions may be gauged as to their kind and their degrees, and the subjective principles of his free choice appraised. Because this empirical character has itself to be derived from the appearances taken as effect, and from their rule, which experience places at our disposal: every action of the human being in appearance stands determined, following the order of nature, out of his empirical character together with the other contributing causes; and were we able to probe every one of {{ 578 }} the appearances of his free choice down to the very bottom, there would not be a single human action we could fail to foretell with certainty and to cognize as necessary from the conditions preceding it. As regards this empirical character, then, freedom is nowhere to be found, and it is by this alone {{{ 373 }}} that the human being can nonetheless be viewed, whenever we mean simply to ***observe*** and, after the fashion of anthropology, to trace out physiologically the moving causes behind his actions.

But when we take these very same actions in their bearing on reason—and that, be it noted, not the speculative reason, so as to ***explain*** them by their origin, but purely in so far as reason is the cause that itself ***generates*** them; in a word, when we set them beside reason with a ***practical*** intent—we then light upon a rule and order of an entirely different kind from the order that nature is. For in that light, it may be, all that ***ought not to have happened*** which has, notwithstanding, in the course of nature ***happened*** and, by its empirical grounds, could not fail to happen. At times, however, we discover—or fancy at any rate that we discover—that the ideas of reason have in fact evinced causality in respect of the actions of the human being as appearances, and that these came about not because empirical causes determined them, but on the contrary because they were determined by grounds of reason.

{{ 579 }} Now let it be supposed that one could say reason has causality in respect of appearance: might the action proceeding from it be styled free, seeing that within its empirical character (its cast of sense) it is determined quite exactly and of necessity? This character, in its turn, is determined within the intelligible character (the cast of thought). The latter, however, is unknown to us; we mark it only through appearances, which in truth afford us immediate cognition of nothing but the cast of sense (the empirical character).[^*] The action, now, in so far as it is to be laid to the cast of thought as its cause, still by no means issues from it in keeping with empirical laws—that is, not in such a way that the conditions of pure reason, but only in such a way that the effects of these within the appearance of inner sense, ***go before***. Pure reason, being a power merely intelligible, is not subjected to the form of time, and hence neither to the conditions of temporal succession. The causality of reason in the intelligible character ***does not come to be***, nor {{{ 374 }}} does it set in at some definite moment so as to bring forth an effect. {{ 580 }} For were it otherwise, it would itself lie under the natural law of appearances, in so far as that law fixes causal series in the order of time; and the causality would then be nature, and not freedom. We shall therefore be in a position to say: if reason is capable of causality with respect to appearances, it is a power ***through*** which the sensible condition of an empirical run of effects has its first onset. For the condition seated in reason is not sensible, and hence does not itself set in. In this way there comes about precisely what we found wanting in all empirical series: that the ***condition*** of a successive train of events might itself, empirically, be unconditioned. For here the condition lies ***beyond*** the series of appearances (in the intelligible), and is thus subjected to no sensible condition and to no determination in time through antecedent causes.

And yet, viewed in another relation, this identical cause belongs to the series of appearances as well. The human being is himself an appearance. His free choice bears an empirical character, and this is the (empirical) cause of everything he does. Not one of the conditions that determine the human being conformably to this character fails to be comprised within the series of natural effects and to obey the law of that series, according to which no empirically unconditioned causality is ever met with in what takes place in time. For this reason no given action (since it admits of being perceived only {{ 581 }} as appearance) can commence absolutely of itself. Of reason, however, one cannot say that some prior state precedes the state wherein it determines the free choice—a prior state in which this latter state is itself determined. For inasmuch as reason is itself no appearance and lies under no conditions of sensibility whatsoever, no succession in time obtains within reason itself with regard to its causality, and so the dynamical law of nature, which fixes temporal succession by rules, admits of no application to it.

Reason, then, is the enduring condition of all the voluntary actions under which the human being makes his appearance. Every one of these stands determined beforehand in the empirical character of the human being, prior to its ever occurring. With respect to the intelligible character, of which the empirical is but the sensible schema, there holds no ***earlier*** or ***later***; and every action, regardless of the temporal relation it bears toward other appearances, is the unmediated effect of the intelligible character of pure reason, {{{ 375 }}} which thus acts in freedom, without being determined dynamically, within the chain of natural causes, by grounds that—whether outward or inward—are yet antecedent in time; and this freedom of reason may be construed not merely negatively, as an independence from empirical conditions (for by that the power of reason would leave off being a cause of the appearances {{ 582 }}), but may also be denoted positively, as a power to inaugurate of itself a series of events, in such wise that within reason itself nothing begins, but rather that reason, as the unconditioned condition of every voluntary action, brooks above itself no conditions antecedent in time, while its effect all the same begins within the series of appearances, though it can never make up therein an absolutely first beginning.

To throw light on the regulative principle of reason by an instance drawn from its empirical employment—not to establish it (for proofs of such a sort avail nothing for transcendental assertions)—let a voluntary action be taken up, say a malicious lie, whereby a man has introduced a certain disorder into society; and let it first be examined with regard to the motive causes from which it sprang, and thereupon appraised as to how it, along with its consequences, may be charged to his account. Under the first head, one works through his empirical character right down to its wellsprings, which one hunts out in a defective upbringing, in bad associations, in part too in the wickedness of a disposition impervious to shame, and in part lays at the door of levity and rashness; nor, in doing so, does one lose sight of the occasioning circumstances that gave rise to it. Throughout all this, one goes to work exactly as one does in tracing the series of determining causes for any given effect of nature. Yet, however much one holds the action {{ 583 }} to be determined thereby, one blames the doer none the less—and that not for his ill-starred disposition, not for the circumstances playing upon him, nor even for the life he has led up to now; for one takes for granted that one may put wholly to one side how that life was constituted, may treat the past series of conditions as though it had never been, and may regard this deed as utterly unconditioned in respect of the foregoing state, as if with it the doer set going a series of consequences wholly of himself. This censure rests upon a law of reason, whereby one looks on reason as a cause that, in defiance of all the aforementioned empirical {{{ 376 }}} conditions, both could and ought to have shaped the man's conduct otherwise. And indeed one views the causality of reason not as some mere concurrence alongside others, but as complete in and of itself, even should the sensible springs of action have stood by no means for it but rather flatly against it; the deed is charged to his intelligible character, and at this moment, the moment in which he tells the lie, the guilt is wholly his; reason, consequently, notwithstanding all the empirical conditions of the deed, was entirely free, and to its default this deed is wholly to be charged.

One readily perceives from this imputing judgment that what one has in mind is this: that reason is in no way affected by all that sensibility; that it does not undergo alteration (though its appearances, {{ 584 }} that is, the manner in which it shows itself in its effects, do alter); that within it no state goes before that would determine the state to follow; and hence that it does not fall at all within the series of sensible conditions which render the appearances necessary in accordance with laws of nature. Reason—it—is present, one and the same, to every action of the human being amid all circumstances of time; yet it is not itself in time, nor does it pass into some fresh state in which it was not before; in respect of that state it is ***determining***, but not ***determinable***. One cannot, therefore, put the question: why has reason not determined ***itself*** otherwise? but only: why has it, by its causality, not determined the ***appearances*** otherwise? To this, however, no answer can be given. For a different intelligible character would have yielded a different empirical one; and when we say that, in spite of the whole course of life led up to that point, the doer might yet have left the lie unspoken, this signifies merely that the lie stands immediately under reason's sway, that reason in its causality lies under no conditions of appearance or of time's passage, and that the difference of time, while indeed it makes a chief difference among appearances relatively to one another, can—since appearances are no things, and hence no causes in themselves—make no difference in the action as it bears on reason.

{{ 585 }} In appraising free actions with regard to their causality, then, we can advance only as far as the intelligible cause, but no ***further than it***; we can cognize that it is free—determined, that is, independently of sensibility—and, on such a footing, that it may be the sensibly unconditioned condition of the appearances. Why, however, the intelligible character, under the circumstances at hand, yields just these appearances and this empirical character {{{ 377 }}}—that so far outruns every power of our reason to answer, nay every title of reason so much as to ask, as though one were asking whence the transcendental object of our outer sensible intuition yields intuition only ***in space*** and no intuition of some other sort. But the problem we were charged to solve lays no such obligation on us, for it ran only thus: whether freedom stands at odds with natural necessity in one and the very same action; and this we have answered sufficiently, having shown that, since with the former a bearing upon a wholly different kind of conditions is possible than with the latter, the law of the latter leaves the former unaffected, so that the two may take place independently of, and without disturbance from, one another.

***

It should be well marked that we have not, by these means, sought to make out the ***actuality*** of {{ 586 }} freedom as one of the powers containing the cause of the appearances of our sensible world. For, apart from the fact that this would have been no transcendental inquiry at all—such an inquiry having to do with concepts alone—it could not, besides, have come off, since out of experience we are never able to draw an inference to anything that is simply not to be thought under laws of experience. Nor, further still, have we even sought to prove the ***possibility*** of freedom; for this too would not have come off, seeing that of no real ground and no causality whatever can we cognize the possibility out of mere concepts _a priori_. Freedom is dealt with here solely as a transcendental idea, whereby reason takes itself to inaugurate the series of conditions in appearance absolutely by means of the sensibly unconditioned, but in so doing becomes entangled in an antinomy with laws of its own—the laws it prescribes to the empirical employment of the understanding. That this antinomy reposes upon a mere semblance, and that nature does at least ***not stand at odds*** with a causality out of freedom—this was the one thing within our power to accomplish, and the single point that concerned us at all.

[^*]: The morality proper to actions (their merit and their guilt)—even the morality of our own conduct—thus stays entirely hidden from us. Our imputations admit of being referred to the empirical character alone. But how much of it is to be set down to the pure effect of freedom, how much to bare nature and to a flaw of temperament for which no one is at fault, or to its fortunate constitution (_merito fortunae_), none can fathom, and hence none can pass judgment upon it with perfect justice.
