---
position: 92
label: "Section 3. Of the arguments of speculative reason in inferring the existence of a supreme being"
depth: 6
aa_page: 392
---

## Section 3. Of the arguments of speculative reason in inferring the existence of a supreme being.

In spite of its urgent need to presuppose something that the understanding could take as the complete ground for the thoroughgoing determination of its concepts, reason notices the ideal and merely fictitious character of such a presupposition much too easily {{ 612 }} to allow itself to be persuaded by this alone straightway to assume a mere creature of its own thinking to be an actual being, were it not urged from another source to seek somewhere for a resting place in the regress from the conditioned, which is given, to the unconditioned, which in itself and as regards its mere concept is not indeed actually given, but which alone can complete the series of conditions carried out to their grounds. Now this is the natural course taken by every human reason, even the most common, although not everyone {{{ 393 }}} perseveres in it. It begins not with concepts, but with common experience, and thus grounds itself on something existing. But this footing gives way unless it rests on the immovable rock of the absolutely necessary. But this itself floats without a support if there is still only empty space outside it and under it, unless it itself fills everything, so that no room is left over for any further ***Why?*** – i.e., unless it is infinite in its reality.

If something, no matter what, exists, then it must also be conceded that something exists ***necessarily***. For the contingent exists only under the condition of something else as its cause, and from this the same inference holds further all the way to a cause not existing contingently and therefore necessarily without condition. That is the argument on which reason grounds its progress to the original being.

{{ 613 }} Now reason looks around for the concept of a being suited for such a privileged existence as absolute necessity, yet not in order to infer its existence _a priori_ from its concept (for if it were confident of that, then it might inquire only among mere concepts, and would not find it necessary to take a given existence as its ground), but rather only in order to find among all the concepts of possible things that one that has nothing within itself conflicting with absolute necessity. For in accordance with the first inference, reason takes it as already settled that something or other has to exist with absolute necessity. If it can now do away with everything that is not compatible with this necessity, except for one, then this is the absolutely necessary being, whether one can comprehend its necessity, i.e., derive it from its concept alone, or not.

Now that the concept of which contains within itself the "Because" to every "Why?" – that which is in no part or respect defective, that which is in all ways sufficient as a condition – seems to be the being suited to absolute necessity just because by itself possessing all the conditions for everything possible, it itself needs no condition, and is indeed not even susceptible of one; consequently, it satisfies the concept of unconditioned necessity on at least one point, in which no other concept can equal it, since every other concept is defective and in need of completion, {{ 614 }} not showing in itself any such mark of its independence of all further conditions. It is true that from this it still cannot be concluded with certainty {{{ 394 }}} that what does not contain within itself the highest and in every respect complete condition must therefore be conditioned in its existence; but then it does not have in itself that single earmark of unconditioned existence which gives reason the power to cognize any being as unconditioned through a concept _a priori._

Thus among all the concepts of possible things the concept of a being having the highest reality would be best suited to the concept of an unconditionally necessary being, and even if it does not fully satisfy this concept, we still have no other choice, but see ourselves compelled to hold to it, because we must not just throw the existence of a necessary being to the winds; yet if we concede this existence, then in the entire field of possibility we cannot find anything that could make a more well-grounded claim to such a privilege in existence.

This, therefore, is how the natural course of human reason is constituted. First it convinces itself of the existence of ***some*** necessary being. In this it recognizes an unconditioned existence. Now it seeks for the concept {{ 615 }} of something independent of all conditions, and finds it in that which is the sufficient condition for everything else, i.e., in that which contains all reality. The All without limits, however, is absolute unity, and carries with it the concept of one single being, namely the highest being; and thus reason infers that the highest being, as the original ground of all things, exists in an absolutely necessary way.

It cannot be disputed that this concept has a certain cogency if it is a matter of making ***decisions***, that is, if the existence of some necessary being is already conceded, and one agrees that one must take sides on where one is to place it; for then one can make no more suitable choice than – or rather, one has no other choice, but is compelled – to vote for the absolute unity of complete reality as the original source of possibility. But if nothing impels us to come to a decision, and we would rather let this entire matter be tabled until we are compelled to give our approval by the full weight of grounds of proof, i.e., if it is merely a matter of ***estimating*** how much we know about this problem and what we merely flatter ourselves that we know – then the above inference does not appear to be in anything like the same advantageous shape and needs some special favor to make up for the defects in its rightful claims.

{{{ 395 }}} For if we let everything stand just as it is here, namely: first, that from any given existence (in any case {{ 616 }} merely my own) there is a valid inference to the existence of an unconditionally necessary being; second, that I have to regard a being that contains all reality, hence all conditions, as absolutely unconditioned, and consequently have found in it the concept of the thing which is suited for absolute necessity; then from this it still cannot be inferred that therefore the concept of a limited being, which does not have the highest reality, contradicts absolute necessity. For even if in its concept I do not find the unconditioned which the All of conditions already carries with it, still it cannot be concluded just from this that its existence must be conditioned; just as I cannot say in a hypothetical syllogism: Where a certain condition (here, namely, completeness according to concepts) is not, there too the conditioned thing is not. Rather we are still at liberty to count all the remaining limited beings equally as absolutely necessary, even though we cannot infer their necessity from the universal concept we have of them. Looked at in this way, however, this argument has not produced for us even the least concept of the properties of a necessary being, and has in fact not achieved anything at all.

Nevertheless there remains to this argument a certain importance and high regard of which it cannot straightway be {{ 617 }} divested simply on account of this objective insufficiency. For suppose there were obligations that were entirely correct in the idea of reason but would have no real application to us, i.e., would be without any incentives, if a highest being were not presupposed who could give effect and emphasis to the practical laws; then we would also have an obligation to follow those concepts, that even though they may not be objectively sufficient, are still preponderant in accordance with the measure of our reason, and in comparison with which we recognize nothing better or more convincing. The duty to choose would here tip the indecisiveness of speculation out of balance through a practical addition; indeed, reason, as the most circumspect judge, could not find any justification for itself if, under the pressure of urgent causes though with defective insight, its judgment were not to follow these grounds, than which we at least know none better.

{{{ 396 }}} This argument, although it is in fact transcendental, since it rests on the inner insufficiency of the contingent, is yet so simple and natural that it is suited to the commonest human understanding as soon as the latter is once led to it. One sees things alter, arise, and perish; therefore they, or at least their state, must have a cause. About every cause, however, that may be {{ 618 }} given in experience, the same thing may once again be asked. Now where could we more appropriately locate the ***supreme*** causality than right where the ***highest*** causality is, i.e., in that being, originally containing within itself what is sufficient for the possible effect, whose concept also comes about very easily through the single trait of an all-encompassing perfection. This highest cause we then take to be absolutely necessary, because we find it absolutely necessary to ascend to it and no ground for going still further beyond it. Therefore even through the blindest polytheism in all peoples we see shimmering a few sparks of monotheism, to which they have been led not by reflection and deep speculation, but only in accordance with a natural course of common understanding becoming gradually intelligible.

## There are only three possible ways of proving the existence of God from speculative reason.

All paths on which one may set forth with this aim either begin from determinate experience and the special constitution of our world of sense known through it, and ascend from that by means of laws of causality to the highest cause outside the world; or else they are empirically grounded on an experience that is only indeterminate, i.e., on some existence; or, finally, they abstract from all experience and infer the existence of a {{ 619 }} highest cause entirely _a priori_ from mere concepts. The first proof is the ***physico-theological***, the second the ***cosmological***, and the third the ***ontological*** proof. There are no more of them, and there also cannot be any more.

I will establish that reason accomplishes just as little on the one path (the empirical) as on the other (the transcendental), and that it spreads its wings in vain when seeking to rise above the world of sense through the mere might of speculation. As to the order in which these species of proof have to be presented for examination, however, it will be just the reverse of that {{{ 397 }}} taken by reason in gradually unfolding itself, and in which we have first placed them. For it will be shown that although experience has given the occasion for them, it is nevertheless merely the ***transcendental concept*** of reason that it has set forth for itself that directs these strivings and holds up the target in all such attempts. Thus I will begin by examining the transcendental proof, and later see what the addition of the empirical can do to increase the force of its proof.
