---
position: 94
label: "Section 5. Of the impossibility of a cosmological proof of the existence of God"
depth: 6
aa_page: 403
---

## {{ 631 }} Section 5. Of the impossibility of a cosmological proof of the existence of God.

It was entirely unnatural, and a mere novelty of scholastic wit, to want to take an idea contrived quite arbitrarily and extract from it the existence of the corresponding object itself. In fact one would never have tried this path if it had not been preceded by a need of our reason to assume for existence in general a basis in something necessary (with which one could stop the ascent), {{{ 404 }}} and if – since this necessity has to be unconditioned and certain _a priori_ – reason were not compelled to seek a concept that, if possible, was sufficient to meet this demand by providing an existence that is supposed to be cognized fully _a priori._ It was believed that this had been found in the idea of a most real being, and this was therefore used only to provide more determinate acquaintance with something of which one was already convinced or persuaded on other grounds that it must exist, namely, the necessary being. Meanwhile this natural course of reason was concealed, and instead of ending with this concept one sought to begin with it in order to derive the necessity of the existence from it, which, however, this concept was fit only to augment. {{ 632 }} From this arose the unfortunate ontological proof, which brings no satisfaction either to the natural and healthy understanding or to scholastically correct examination.

***The cosmological proof***, which we will now investigate, retains the connection of absolute necessity with the highest reality, but instead of inferring as in the previous argument from the highest reality to necessity of existence, it rather infers from the previously given unconditioned necessity of some being or other to the unbounded reality of this being, thus setting everything on the track of a species of inference that, whether reasonable or sophistical, is at least natural, and has been the most persuasive one not only for the common but also for the speculative understanding; it is also the one that visibly draws the outlines for all the proofs of natural theology, outlines which have always been followed and will be followed further, however one might try to embellish and disguise them with so much foliage and scrollwork. This proof, which Leibniz also called the proof _a contingentia mundi_, we will now place before our eyes and subject to examination.

It goes as follows: If something exists, then an absolutely necessary being also has to exist. Now I myself, at least, exist; therefore, an absolutely necessary being exists. The minor premise contains an experience, {{ 633 }} the major premise an inference from an experience in general to the existence of something necessary.[^*] Thus the proof really starts from experience, {{{ 405 }}} so it is not carried out entirely _a priori_ or ontologically; and because the object of all possible experience is called “world,” it is therefore termed the ***cosmological*** proof. Since it also abstracts from every particular property of objects of experience through which this world might differ from any other possible world, it is already distinguished by this terminology from the physico-theological proof, which uses observations about the particular constitution of this sensible world of ours for its grounds of proof.

Now the proof further infers: The necessary being can be determined only in one single way, i.e., in regard to all possible predicates, it can be determined by only one of them, so consequently it must be thoroughly determined through its concept. Now only one single concept of a thing is possible that thoroughly determines the thing _a priori,_ namely that of an _ens realissimum_. Thus the concept of the most real being is the only single one {{ 634 }} through which a necessary being can be thought, i.e., there necessarily exists a highest being.

In this cosmological argument so many sophistical principles come together that speculative reason seems to have summoned up all its dialectical art so as to produce the greatest possible transcendental illusion. We will put off examining it for a while, so as in the meantime to make plain only one ruse through which it sets up an old argument in disguised form as a new one, and appeals to the agreement of two witnesses, namely a pure rational witness and another with empirical credentials, where only the first is there all alone, merely altering his clothing and voice so as to be taken for a second. In order to ground itself securely, this proof gets a footing in experience, and thereby gives itself the reputation that it is distinct from the ontological proof, which puts its whole trust solely in pure concepts _a priori._ But the cosmological proof avails itself of this experience only to make a single step, namely to the existence of a necessary being in general. What this being might have in the way of properties, the {{{ 406 }}} empirical ground of proof cannot teach; rather, here reason says farewell to it entirely and turns its inquiry back to mere concepts: namely, to what kinds of properties in general {{ 635 }} an absolutely necessary being would have to have, i.e., which among all possible things contains within itself the required conditions (_requisita_) for an absolute necessity. Now reason believes it meets with these requisites solely and uniquely in the concept of a most real being, and so it infers: that is the absolutely necessary being. But it is clear that here one presupposes that the concept of a being of the highest reality completely suffices for the concept of an absolute necessity in existence, i.e., that from the former the latter may be inferred – a proposition the ontological proof asserted, which one thus assumes in the cosmological proof and takes as one’s ground, although one had wanted to avoid it. For absolute necessity is an existence from mere concepts. Now if I say: the concept of the _ens realissimum_ is a concept, and indeed the one single concept, that fits necessary existence and is adequate to it, then I must admit that the latter could be concluded from it. Thus it is really only the ontological proof from mere concepts that contains all the force of proof in the so-called cosmological proof; and the supposed experience is quite superfluous – perhaps leading us only to the concept of a necessary being, but not so as to establish this concept in any determinate thing. For as soon as we have this intention, we have to abandon all experience at once and seek among pure concepts for the one that might contain the conditions for the possibility of {{ 636 }} an absolutely necessary being. But if there is insight into the possibility of such a being in such a way, then its existence is established too; for then what is meant is: among all possibles there is one that carries absolute necessity with it, i.e., this being exists with absolute necessity.

All semblances in inferring are most easily discovered if one puts them before one’s eyes in a scholastically correct way. Here is such a presentation.

If the proposition is correct: “Every absolutely necessary being is at the same time the most real being” (which is the _nervus probandi_ of the cosmological proof), then like any affirmative judgment, it must be convertible _per accidens,_ thus: “Some most real beings are at the same time absolutely necessary beings.” But now one _ens realissimum_ {{{ 407 }}} does not differ the least bit from another, and thus what holds of ***some*** beings contained under this concept holds also of ***all***. Hence I will also be able (in this case) to convert the proposition ***absolutely***, i.e., “Every most real being is a necessary being.” Now because this proposition is determined merely from its concepts _a priori_, the mere concept of the most real being must also carry with it the absolute necessity of this being – which is just what the ontological proof asserts and the cosmological proof {{ 637 }} does not want to recognize, despite the fact that it underlies its inferences, though in a covert way.

Thus the second way that speculative reason takes in order to prove the existence of the highest being is not only deceptive like the first, but it even has this further blamable feature in it, that it commits an _ignoratio elenchi_, promising to put us on a new footpath, but after a little digression bringing us once again back to the old one, which for its sake we had left behind.

A short time ago I said that in this cosmological argument an entire nest of dialectical presumptions is hidden, which transcendental criticism can easily discover and destroy. I will now only cite them, leaving it to the reader to investigate further their deceptive principles and remove them.

There is, for example: 1) The transcendental principle of inferring from the contingent to a cause, which has significance only in the world of sense, but which outside it does not even have a sense. For the merely intellectual concept of the contingent cannot produce any synthetic proposition, such as that of causality, and the principle of causality has no significance at all and no mark of its use except in the world of sense; here, however, it is supposed to serve precisely to get {{ 638 }} beyond the world of sense. 2) The inference from the impossibility of an infinite series of causes given one upon another to a first cause, which the principles of the use of reason itself cannot justify our inferring within experience, still less our extending this principle to somewhere beyond it (into which the causal chain cannot be extended at all). 3) The false self-satisfaction reason finds in regard to the completion of this series by the fact that one finally does away with every condition – without which, however, there can be no concept of any necessity – and then since one cannot comprehend anything further, one assumes this to be the completion of one’s concept. 4) The {{{ 408 }}} confusion of the logical possibility of a concept of all reality united (without internal contradiction) with its transcendental possibility, which requires a principle of the feasibility of such a synthesis, but which once again can apply only to the field of possible experiences, etc.

The artifice of the cosmological proof is aimed merely at evading a proof of the existence of a necessary being _a priori_ through mere concepts, which would have to be carried out ontologically, for which, however, we feel ourselves entirely incapable. In this respect, on the ground of an actual existence (an experience in general), we infer, as best we can, some absolutely necessary condition of that existence. Then we have {{ 639 }} no necessity of explaining the possibility of this condition. For, if it has been proved that it exists, then the question of its possibility is quite unnecessary. Now if we want to determine this necessary being more closely as to its constitution, then we do not seek what would suffice to comprehend from its concept the necessity of its existence; for if we could do that, then we would not have had the need of any empirical presupposition; no, we seek only the negative condition (_conditio sine qua non_) without which a being would not be absolutely necessary. Now that might very well get by in any other species of inference from a given consequence to its ground; but here, unfortunately, it so happens that the condition that one demands for absolute necessity can be encountered only in a single being, which therefore must contain everything in its concept that is required for absolute necessity, and thus makes possible an inference _a priori_ to that; i.e., I have to be able to infer conversely that whatever thing this concept (of the highest reality) pertains to, that thing is absolutely necessary; and if I cannot so infer (as I must admit, if I want to avoid the ontological proof), then I have come to grief on my new path, and find myself once again right back where I started. The concept of the highest being satisfies all questions _a priori_ that can be posed about the inner determinations of a thing, and it is therefore {{ 640 }} an ideal without equal, because the universal concept at the same time distinguishes it as one individual among all possible things. But it does not deal at all satisfactorily with the question about its own existence, though that is really all that was at issue; and to those who assume the existence of a necessary being, and would only know {{{ 409 }}} which among all things had to be regarded as such a thing, one could not answer: This thing here is the necessary being.

It may well be allowed to ***assume*** the existence of a being of the highest sufficiency as the cause of all possible effects, in order to facilitate reason’s search for the unity of its grounds of explanation. Yet to go so far as to say, ***Such a being exists necessarily***, is no longer the modest expression of an allowable hypothesis, but rather the impudent presumption of an apodictic certainty; for if one proposes to cognize something as absolutely necessary, then that cognition must also carry absolute necessity with it.

The entire problem of the transcendental ideal comes to this: either to find a concept for the absolute necessity or to find the absolute necessity for the concept of some thing. If one can do the first, then one must be able to do the other too; for reason cognizes as absolutely necessary only what is necessary from its {{ 641 }} concept. But both entirely transcend all the utmost efforts to ***satisfy*** our understanding on this point, but also all attempts to make it ***content*** with its incapacity.

The unconditioned necessity, which we need so indispensably as the ultimate sustainer of all things, is for human reason the true abyss. Even eternity – however awful the sublimity with which a Haller might portray it – does not make such a dizzying impression on the mind; for eternity only ***measures*** the duration of things, but it does not ***sustain*** that duration. One cannot resist the thought of it, but one also cannot bear it that a being that we represent to ourselves as the highest among all possible beings might, as it were, say to itself: “I am from eternity to eternity, outside me is nothing except what is something merely through my will; ***but whence*** then am I?” Here everything gives way beneath us, and the greatest perfection as well as the smallest, hovers without support before speculative reason, for which it would cost nothing to let the one as much as the other disappear without the least obstacle.

Many forces of nature that express their existence only through certain effects remain inscrutable for us, for we cannot trace them far enough through observation. The transcendental object lying at the ground of appearances, and with it the ground why our {{ 642 }} sensibility has it rather than another supreme condition {{{ 410 }}} – these are and remain inscrutable for us, even though the thing itself is given, only we have no insight into it. An ideal of pure reason, however, cannot be called ***inscrutable***, because it has to display no further credentials for its reality than the need of reason to complete all synthetic unity by means of it. Since it is not even given as a thinkable object, it is also not inscrutable as such an object; rather, as a mere idea it must find both its seat and its solution in the nature of reason, and so it can be investigated; for reason consists just in the fact that we can give an account of all our concepts, opinions and assertions, either on objective grounds or, if they are a mere illusion, on subjective ones.

[^*]: This inference is too well known for it to be necessary to expound it in detail here: it rests on the allegedly transcendental natural law of causality that everything ***contingent*** must have a cause, which, if it in turn is contingent, must likewise have its cause, until the series of causes subordinated one to another has to end with an absolutely necessary cause, without which it would have no completeness.
