---
position: 104
label: "Section 1. The discipline of pure reason in its dogmatic use"
depth: 3
aa_page: 468
---

## Section 1. The discipline of pure reason in its dogmatic use

Mathematics gives the most resplendent example of pure reason happily expanding itself without assistance from experience. Examples are contagious, especially for the same faculty, which naturally flatters itself that it will have the same good fortune in other cases that it has had in one. Hence pure {{ 741 }} reason hopes to be able to expand itself in as happy and well-grounded a way {{{ 469 }}} in its transcendental use as it succeeded in doing in its mathematical use, if it applies the same method there that was of such evident utility here. It is therefore very important for us to know whether the method for obtaining apodictic certainty that one calls mathematical in the latter science is identical with that by means of which one seeks the same certainty in philosophy, and which would there have to be called dogmatic.

The ***philosophical*** cognition is ***rational cognition from concepts***, the ***mathematical*** is that from the ***construction*** of concepts. But to construct a concept means: to exhibit the intuition corresponding to it _a priori_. For the construction of a concept, therefore, a non-empirical intuition is required, which consequently, as intuition, is an individual object, but must nevertheless, as the construction of a concept (of a general representation), express in the representation universal validity for all possible intuitions that belong under the same concept. Thus I construct a triangle by exhibiting the object corresponding to this concept, either through mere imagination in pure intuition, or in accordance with it also on paper in empirical intuition, but in both cases completely _a priori_, without having borrowed the pattern for it from any experience. The individual drawn figure is empirical, and nevertheless serves to express the concept without damage {{ 742 }} to its universality, because in this empirical intuition we always take account only of the action of constructing the concept, to which many determinations, e.g., of magnitude, of sides, and of angles, are entirely indifferent, and thus we abstract from these differences, which do not alter the concept of the triangle.

Philosophical cognition thus considers the particular only in the universal, but mathematical cognition considers the universal in the particular, indeed even in the individual, yet nonetheless _a priori_ and by means of reason, so that just as this individual is determined under certain general conditions of construction, the object of the concept, to which this individual corresponds only as its schema, must likewise be thought as universally determined.

The essential difference between these two kinds of rational cognition therefore consists in this form, and does not rest on the difference in their matter, or objects. Those who thought to distinguish philosophy from mathematics by saying of the former that it {{{ 470 }}} has merely ***quality*** while the latter has only ***quantity*** as its object, have taken the effect for the cause. The form of mathematical cognition is the cause of its pertaining solely to _quanta_. For only the concept of magnitudes can be constructed, i.e., exhibited _a priori_ {{ 743 }} in intuition, while qualities cannot be exhibited in anything but empirical intuition. Hence a rational cognition of them can be possible only through concepts. Thus no one can ever derive an intuition corresponding to the concept of reality from anywhere except experience, and can never partake of it _a priori_ from oneself and prior to empirical consciousness. The shape of a cone can be made intuitive without any empirical assistance, merely in accordance with the concept, but the color of this cone must first be given in one experience or another. I cannot exhibit the concept of a cause in general in intuition in any way except in an example given to me by experience, etc. Moreover, philosophy deals just as much with magnitudes as mathematics, e.g., with totality, infinity, etc. Mathematics also occupies itself with the difference between lines and planes as spaces with different quality, and with the continuity of extension as a quality of it. But although in such cases they have a common object, the manner of dealing with it through reason is entirely different in philosophical than in mathematical consideration. The former confines itself solely to general concepts, the latter cannot do anything with the mere concept but hurries immediately to intuition, in which it considers the concept _in concreto,_ although not empirically, {{ 744 }} but rather solely as one which it has exhibited _a priori,_ i.e., constructed, and in which that which follows from the general conditions of the construction must also hold generally of the object of the constructed concept.

Give a philosopher the concept of a triangle, and let him try to find out in his way how the sum of its angles might be related to a right angle. He has nothing but the concept of a figure enclosed by three straight lines, and in it the concept of equally many angles. Now he may reflect on this concept as long as he wants, yet he will never produce anything new. He can analyze and make distinct the concept of a straight line, or of an angle, or of the number three, but he will not come upon any other properties {{{ 471 }}} that do not already lie in these concepts. But now let the geometer take up this question. He begins at once to construct a triangle. Since he knows that two right angles together are exactly equal to all of the adjacent angles that can be drawn at one point on a straight line, he extends one side of his triangle, and obtains two adjacent angles that together are equal to two right ones. Now he divides the external one of these angles by drawing a line parallel to the opposite side of the triangle, and sees that here there arises an external adjacent angle which is equal to an internal one, etc. In such a way, through a chain of inferences that is always guided by intuition, he arrives at a fully illuminating {{ 745 }} and at the same time general solution of the question.

But mathematics does not merely construct magnitudes (_quanta_), as in geometry, but also mere magnitude (_quantitatem_), as in algebra, where it entirely abstracts from the constitution of the object that is to be thought in accordance with such a concept of magnitude. In this case it chooses a certain notation for all construction of magnitudes in general (numbers), as well as addition, subtraction, extraction of roots, etc.; and, after it has also designated the general concept of quantities in accordance with their different relations, it then exhibits all the procedures through which magnitude is generated and altered in accordance with certain rules in intuition; where one magnitude is to be divided by another, it places their symbols together in accordance with the form of notation for division, etc., and thereby achieves by a symbolic construction equally well what geometry does by an ostensive or geometrical construction (of the objects themselves), which discursive cognition could never achieve by means of mere concepts.

What might be the cause of the very different situations in which these two reasoners find themselves, one of whom makes his way in accordance with concepts, the other in accordance with intuitions that he exhibits _a priori_ for the concepts? According to the transcendental fundamental doctrine expounded above, {{ 746 }} this cause is clear. At issue here are not analytic propositions, which can be generated through mere analysis of concepts (here the philosopher would without doubt have the advantage over his rival), but synthetic ones, and indeed ones that are to be cognized _a priori._ For I am not to see what I {{{ 472 }}} actually think in my concept of a triangle (this is nothing further than its mere definition); rather I am to go beyond it to properties that do not lie in this concept but still belong to it. Now this is not possible in any way but by determining my object in accordance with the conditions of either empirical or pure intuition. The former would yield only an empirical proposition (through measurement of its angles), which would contain no universality, let alone necessity, and propositions of this sort are not under discussion here. The second procedure, however, is that of mathematical and here indeed of geometrical construction, by means of which I put together in a pure intuition, just as in an empirical one, the manifold that belongs to the schema of a triangle in general and thus to its concept, through which general synthetic propositions must be constructed.

In vain, therefore, would I reflect on the triangle philosophically, i.e., discursively, {{ 747 }} without thereby getting any further than the mere definition with which, however, I had to begin. There is, to be sure, a transcendental synthesis from concepts alone, with which in turn only the philosopher can succeed, but which never concerns more than a thing in general, under which conditions its perception could belong to possible experience. But in mathematical problems the question is not about this nor about existence as such at all, but about the properties of the objects in themselves, solely insofar as these are combined with the concept of them.

In these examples we have only attempted to make distinct what a great difference there is between the discursive use of reason in accordance with concepts and its intuitive use through the construction of concepts. Now the question naturally arises, what is the cause that makes such a twofold use of reason necessary, and by means of which conditions can one know whether only the first or also the second takes place?

All of our cognition is in the end related to possible intuitions: for through these alone is an object given. Now an _a priori_ concept (a non-empirical concept) either already contains a pure intuition in itself, in which case it can be constructed; {{{ 473 }}} or else it contains nothing but the synthesis of possible intuitions, which are not given _a priori,_ in which case one can well judge synthetically and {{ 748 }} _a priori_ by its means, but only discursively, in accordance with concepts, and never intuitively through the construction of the concept.

Now of all intuition none is given _a priori_ except the mere form of appearances, space and time, and a concept of these, as _quanta_, can be exhibited _a priori_ in intuition, i.e., constructed, together with either their quality (their shape) or else merely their quantity (the mere synthesis of the homogeneous manifold) through number. The matter of appearances, however, through which ***things*** in space and time are given to us, can be represented only in perception, thus _a posteriori._ The only concept that represents this empirical content of appearances _a priori_ is the concept of the ***thing*** in general, and the synthetic _a priori_ cognition of this can never yield _a priori_ more than the mere rule of the synthesis of that which perception may give _a posteriori,_ but never the intuition of the real object, since this must necessarily be empirical.

Synthetic propositions that pertain to ***things*** in general, the intuition of which cannot be given _a priori,_ are transcendental. Thus transcendental propositions can never be given through construction of concepts, but only in accordance with _a priori_ concepts. They contain merely the rule in accordance with which a certain synthetic unity of that which cannot be intuitively represented _a priori_ (of perceptions) {{ 749 }} should be sought empirically. They cannot, however, exhibit a single one of their concepts _a priori_ in any case, but do this only _a posteriori,_ by means of experience, which first becomes possible in accordance with those synthetic principles.

If one is to judge synthetically about a concept, then one must go beyond this concept, and indeed go to the intuition in which it is given. For if one were to remain with that which is contained in the concept, then the judgment would be merely analytic, an explanation of what is actually contained in the thought. However, I can go from the concept to the pure or empirical intuition corresponding to it in order to assess it _in concreto_ and, {{{ 474 }}} cognize _a priori_ or _a posteriori_ what pertains to its object. The former is rational and mathematical cognition through the construction of the concept, the latter merely empirical (mechanical) cognition, which can never yield necessary and apodictic propositions. Thus I could analyze my empirical concept of ***gold*** without thereby gaining anything more than being able to enumerate what I actually think by means of this word, which would certainly produce a logical improvement in my cognition, but no augmentation or supplementation of it. But I can take the matter that goes by this name and initiate perceptions of it, which will provide me with various {{ 750 }} synthetic though empirical propositions. The mathematical concept of a triangle I would construct, i.e., give in intuition _a priori,_ and in this way I would acquire synthetic but rational cognition. However, if I am given the transcendental concept of a reality, substance, force, etc., it designates neither an empirical nor a pure intuition, but only the synthesis of empirical intuitions (which thus cannot be given _a priori_); and since the synthesis cannot proceed _a priori_ to the intuition that corresponds to it, no determining synthetic proposition but only a principle of the synthesis[^*] of possible empirical intuitions can arise from it. A transcendental proposition is therefore a synthetic rational cognition in accordance with mere concepts, and thus discursive, since through it all synthetic unity of empirical cognition first becomes possible, but no intuition is given by it _a priori._

{{ 751 }} There are thus two uses of reason, which, regardless of the universality of cognition and its _a priori_ generation, which they have in common, are nevertheless very different in procedure, precisely because there are two components to the appearance through which all objects are given {{{ 475 }}} to us: the form of intuition (space and time), which can be cognized and determined completely _a priori_, and the matter (the physical), or the content, which signifies a something that is encountered in space and time, and which thus contains an existence and corresponds to sensation. With regard to the latter, which can never be given in a determinate manner except empirically, we can have nothing _a priori_ except indeterminate concepts of the synthesis of possible sensations insofar as they belong to the unity of apperception (in a possible experience). With regard to the former we can determine our concepts _a priori_ in intuition, for we create the objects themselves in space and time through homogeneous synthesis, considering them merely as _quanta._ The former is called the use of reason in accordance with concepts, because we can do nothing further than bring appearances under concepts, according to their real content, which cannot be determined except empirically, i.e., _a posteriori_ (though in accord with those concepts as rules of an empirical synthesis); the latter is the use of reason through construction of concepts, because {{ 752 }} these concepts, since they already apply to an _a priori_ intuition, for that very reason can be determinately given in pure intuition _a priori_ and without any empirical _data._ To decide about everything that exists (a thing in space or time) whether and how far it is or is not a quantum, whether existence or the lack thereof must be represented in it, how far this something (which fills space or time) is a primary substratum or mere determination, whether it has a relation of its existence to something else as cause or effect, and finally whether with regard to its existence it is isolated or in reciprocal dependence with others; to decide about the possibility, actuality, and necessity of its existence or the opposites thereof: all of this belongs to ***rational cognition from concepts***, which is called ***philosophical.*** But to determine an intuition _a priori_ in space (shape), to divide time (duration), or merely to cognize the universal in the synthesis of one and the same thing in time and space and the magnitude of an intuition in general (number) which arises from that: that is a ***concern of reason*** through construction of the concepts, and is called ***mathematical.***

The great good fortune that reason enjoys by means of mathematics leads entirely naturally to the expectation that, if not mathematics itself, {{{ 476 }}} then at least its method will also succeed outside of the field of magnitudes, {{ 753 }} since it brings all of its concepts to intuitions that it can give _a priori_ and by means of which, so to speak, it becomes master over ***nature***; while pure philosophy, on the contrary, fumbles around in nature with discursive _a priori_ concepts without being able to make their reality intuitive _a priori_ and by that means confirm it. Further, the masters of this art do not seem to lack any confidence in themselves, nor does the public seem to lack any great expectations of their talents, should they ever concern themselves about this at all. For since they have hardly ever philosophized about mathematics (a difficult business!), they have never given a thought to the specific difference between the two uses of reason. Rules used customarily and empirically, which they have borrowed from common reason, count as axioms with them. From whence the concepts of space and time with which they busy themselves (as the only original _quanta_) might be derived, they have never concerned themselves, and likewise it seems to them to be useless to investigate the origin of pure concepts of the understanding and the scope of their validity; rather, they merely use them. In all of this they proceed quite correctly, as long as they do not overstep their appointed boundaries, namely those of ***nature.*** But they slip unnoticed from the field of sensibility to the insecure territory of pure and even transcendental concepts, where the ground (_instabilis tellus, innabilis unda_) allows them neither to stand {{ 754 }} nor swim, and they can make only perfunctory steps of which time does not preserve the least trace, while on the contrary their progress in mathematics is a high road on which even their most remote descendants can still stride with confidence.

Since we have made it our duty to determine the bounds of pure reason in transcendental use exactly and with certainty, but this sort of endeavor has the peculiarity that, in spite of the most pressing and clearest warnings, it still always lets itself hope that it can stave off having to give up entirely the effort to get beyond the bounds of experience into the charming regions of the intellectual, it is therefore necessary to cut away, as it were, the last anchor of a fantastical hope, and to show that the pursuit of the mathematical method in this sort of cognition cannot offer the least advantage, unless it is that of revealing its {{{ 477 }}} own nakedness all the more distinctly, and revealing that mathematics and philosophy are two entirely different things, although they offer each other their hand in natural science, thus that the procedure of the one can never be imitated by that of the other.

Mathematics is thoroughly grounded on definitions, axioms, and demonstrations. I will content myself with showing that none of these elements, in the sense in which the mathematician takes them, can be achieved or imitated by philosophy; and that {{ 755 }} by means of his method the mathematician can build nothing in philosophy except houses of cards, while by means of his method the philosopher can produce nothing in mathematics but idle chatter, while philosophy consists precisely in knowing its bounds, and even the mathematician, if his talent is not already bounded by nature and limited to his specialty, can neither reject its warnings nor disregard them.

1. On **definitions**. ***To define*** properly means, as the expression itself reveals, just to exhibit originally the exhaustive concept of a thing within its boundaries.[^**] Given such a requirement, an ***empirical*** concept cannot be defined at all but only ***explicated.*** For since we have in it only some marks of a certain kind of objects of the senses, it is never certain whether by means of the word that designates the same object one does not sometimes {{ 756 }} think more of these marks but another time fewer of them. Thus in the concept of ***gold*** one person might think, besides its weight, color, and ductility, its property of not rusting, while another might know nothing about this. One makes use of certain marks only as long as they are sufficient for making distinctions; new observations, however, take some away and add some, and therefore the concept never remains within secure boundaries. And in any case what would be the point of defining such a concept? – since when, e.g., water and its properties are under discussion, one will not {{{ 478 }}} stop at what is intended by the word "water" but rather advance to experiments, and the word, with the few marks that are attached to it, is to constitute only a ***designation*** and not a concept of the thing; thus the putative definition is nothing other than the determination of the word. Second, strictly speaking no concept given _a priori_ can be defined, e.g., substance, cause, right, equity, etc. For I can never be certain that the distinct representation of a (still confused) given concept has been exhaustively developed unless I know that it is adequate to the object. But since the concept of the latter, as it is given, can contain many obscure representations, which we pass by in our analysis though we always use them in application, the exhaustiveness of the analysis {{ 757 }} of my concept is always doubtful, and by many appropriate examples can only be made ***probably***, but never ***apodictically*** certain. Instead of the expression definition I would rather use that of ***exposition,*** which is always cautious, and which the critic can accept as valid to a certain degree while yet retaining reservations about its exhaustiveness. Since therefore neither empirical concepts nor concepts given _a priori_ can be defined, there remain none but arbitrarily thought ones for which one can attempt this trick. In such a case I can always define my concept: for I must know what I wanted to think, since I deliberately made it up, and it was not given to me either through the nature of the understanding or through experience; but I cannot say that I have thereby defined a true object. For if the concept depends upon empirical conditions, e.g., a chronometer, then the object and its possibility are not given through this arbitrary concept; from the concept I do not even know whether it has an object, and my explanation could better be called a declaration (of my project) than a definition of an object. Thus there remain no other concepts that are fit for being defined than those containing an arbitrary synthesis which can be constructed _a priori_, and thus only mathematics has definitions. For the object that it thinks it also exhibits _a priori_ in intuition, and this {{ 758 }} can surely contain neither more nor less than the concept, since through the explanation of the concept the object is originally given, i.e., without the explanation being derived from anywhere else. The German {{{ 479 }}} language has for the expressions ***exposition***, ***explication***, ***declaration*** and ***definition*** nothing more than the one word ***explanation***; and hence we must somewhat weaken the stringency of the requirement by which we denied philosophical explanations the honorary title of 'definition,' and limit this entire remark to this, that philosophical definitions come about only as ***expositions*** of given concepts, but mathematical ones as ***constructions*** of concepts that are originally made, thus the former come about only analytically through analysis (the completeness of which is never apodictically certain), while the latter come about synthetically, and therefore ***make*** the concept itself, while the former only ***explain*** it. From this it follows:

a) That in philosophy one must not imitate mathematics in putting the definitions first, unless perhaps as a mere experiment. For since they are analyses of given concepts, these concepts, though perhaps only still confused, come first, and the incomplete exposition precedes the complete one, so that we can often infer much from some marks that we have drawn from an as yet uncompleted analysis before we have arrived at a complete exposition, i.e., at a definition; in a word, it follows that in philosophy {{ 759 }} the definition, as distinctness made precise, must conclude rather than begin the work.[^***] On the contrary, in mathematics we do not have any concept at all prior to the definitions, as that through which the concept is first given; it therefore must and also always can begin with them.

b) Mathematical definitions can never err. For because {{{ 480 }}} the concept is first given through the definition, it contains just that which the definition would think through it. However, although nothing incorrect can occur in its content, nevertheless sometimes, though to be sure only rarely, there can be a defect in the form (of its dress), namely with regard to precision. Thus the common explanation of the circle, that it is a ***curved*** line every point of which is the same distance from a {{ 760 }} single one (the center-point), contains the error of unnecessarily introducing the determination curved. For it must be a particular theorem, which can be deduced from the definition and easily proved, that every line each point of which is equally distant from a single one is curved (no part of it is straight). Analytical definitions, on the contrary, can err in many ways, either by bringing in marks that really do not lie in the concept or by lacking the exhaustiveness that constitutes what is essential in definitions, since one cannot be so entirely certain of the completeness of their analysis. For this reason the mathematical method of definition cannot be imitated in philosophy.

2. On **axioms**. These are synthetic _a priori_ principles, insofar as they are immediately certain. Now one concept cannot be synthetically yet immediately combined with another, since for us to be able to go beyond a concept a third, mediating cognition is necessary. Now since philosophy is merely rational cognition in accordance with concepts, no principle is to be encountered in it that deserves the name of an axiom. Mathematics, on the contrary, is capable of ***axioms***, because by means of the construction of concepts in the intuition of the object it can connect the predicates of the latter _a priori_ and immediately, {{ 761 }} e.g., that three points always lie in a plane. A synthetic principle, on the contrary, e.g., the proposition that everything that happens has its cause, can never be immediately certain from mere concepts, because I must always look around for some third thing, namely the condition of time-determination in an experience, and could never directly cognize such a principle immediately from concepts alone. Discursive principles are therefore something entirely different from intuitive ones, i.e., axioms. The former always require a deduction, with which the latter can entirely dispense, and, since the latter are on the same account self-evident {{{ 481 }}} which the philosophical principles, for all their certainty, can never pretend to be, any synthetic proposition of pure and transcendental reason is infinitely less obvious (as is stubbornly said) than the proposition that ***Two times two is four.*** To be sure, in the Analytic, in the table of the principles of pure understanding, I have also thought of certain axioms of intuition; but the principle that was introduced there was not itself an axiom, but only served to provide the _principium_ of the possibility of axioms in general, and was itself only a principle from concepts. For even the possibility of mathematics must be shown in transcendental philosophy. Philosophy thus has no axioms and can never simply offer its _a priori_ principles as such, but must content itself with justifying their authority through a {{ 762 }} thorough deduction.

3. On **demonstrations**. Only an apodictic proof, insofar as it is intuitive, can be called a ***demonstration***. Experience may well teach us what is, but not that it could not be otherwise. Hence empirical grounds of proof cannot yield apodictic proof. From _a priori_ concepts (in discursive cognition), however, intuitive certainty, i.e., evidence, can never arise, however apodictically certain the judgment may otherwise be. Thus only mathematics contains demonstrations, since it does not derive its cognition from concepts, but from their construction, i.e., from the intuition that can be given _a priori_ corresponding to the concepts. Even the way algebraists proceed with their equations, from which by means of reduction they bring forth the truth together with the proof, is not a geometrical construction, but it is still a characteristic construction, in which one displays by signs in intuition the concepts, especially of the relations of quantities, and, without even regarding the heuristic, secures all inferences against mistakes by placing each of them before one’s eyes. Philosophical cognition, on the contrary, must do without this advantage, since it must always consider the universal _in abstracto_ (through concepts), while mathematics can assess the universal _in concreto_ (in the individual intuition) and yet through pure _a priori_ intuition, {{ 763 }} where every false step becomes visible. Since they can only be conducted by means of mere words (the object in thought), I would therefore prefer to call the former ***acroamatic*** (discursive) proofs rather than {{{ 482 }}} ***demonstrations***, which, as the expression already indicates, proceed through the intuition of the object.

Now from all of this it follows that it is not suited to the nature of philosophy, especially in the field of pure reason, to strut about with a dogmatic gait and to decorate itself with the titles and ribbons of mathematics, to whose ranks philosophy does not belong, although it has every cause to hope for a sisterly union with it. These are idle pretensions that can never succeed, but that instead countermand its aim of revealing the deceptions of a reason that misjudges its own boundaries and of bringing the self-conceit of speculation back to modest but thorough self-knowledge by means of a sufficient illumination of our concepts. In its transcendental efforts, therefore, reason cannot look ahead so confidently, as if the path on which it has traveled leads quite directly to the goal, and it must not count so boldly on the premises that ground it as if it were unnecessary for it frequently to look back and consider whether there might not be errors in the progress {{ 764 }} of its inferences to be discovered that were overlooked in its principles and that make it necessary either to determine them further or else to alter them entirely.

I divide all apodictic propositions (whether they are demonstrable or immediately certain) into ***dogmata*** and ***mathemata***. A direct synthetic proposition from concepts is a ***dogma***; such a proposition through construction of concepts, on the contrary, is a ***mathema***. Analytic judgments do not really teach us anything more about the object than what the concept that we have of it already contains in itself, since they do not expand cognition beyond the concept of the subject, but only elucidate this concept. They cannot therefore properly be called dogmas (a word which one could perhaps translate as ***theorems***). But in accordance with ordinary usage, of the two types of synthetic _a priori_ propositions only those belonging to philosophical cognition carry this name, and one would hardly call the propositions of arithmetic or geometry dogmata. This usage thus confirms the explanation we have given that only judgments from concepts, and not those from the construction of concepts, can be called dogmatic.

Now all of pure reason in its merely speculative {{{ 483 }}} use contains not a single direct synthetic judgment from concepts. For through ideas, as we have shown, it is not capable of any synthetic judgments that would have objective validity; through concepts of the understanding, {{ 765 }} however, it certainly erects secure principles, but not directly from concepts, but rather always only indirectly through the relation of these concepts to something entirely contingent, namely ***possible experience***; since if this (something as object of possible experience) is presupposed, then they are of course apodictically certain, but in themselves they cannot even be cognized _a priori_ (directly) at all. Thus no one can have fundamental insight into the proposition "Everything that happens has its cause" from these given concepts alone. Hence it is not a ***dogma***, although from another point of view, namely that of the sole field of its possible use, i.e., experience, it can very well be proved apodictically. But although it must be proved, it is called a ***principle*** and not a ***theorem*** because it has the special property that it first makes possible its ground of proof, namely experience, and must always be presupposed in this.

Now if in the content of the speculative use of pure reason there are no dogmata at all, then any ***dogmatic*** method, whether it is borrowed from the mathematicians or is of some special kind, is inappropriate per se. For it merely masks mistakes and errors, and deceives philosophy, the proper aim of which is to allow all of the steps of reason to be seen in the clearest light. Nevertheless, the method can always be ***systematic***. For our reason itself (subjectively) is a system, but in its pure use, {{ 766 }} by means of mere concepts, only a system for research in accordance with principles of unity, for which ***experience*** alone can give the matter. Of the special method of a transcendental philosophy, however, nothing can here be said, since we are concerned only with a critique of the circumstances of our faculty – whether we can build at all, and how high we can carry our building with the materials that we have (the pure _a priori_ concepts).

[^*]: By means of the concept of cause I actually go beyond the empirical concept of an occurrence (that something happens), but not to the intuition that exhibits the concept of cause _in concreto,_ rather to the time-conditions in general that may be found to be in accord with the concept of cause in experience. I therefore proceed merely in accordance with concepts, and cannot proceed through construction of concepts, since the concept is a rule of the synthesis of perceptions, which are not pure intuitions and which therefore cannot be given _a priori._

[^**]: ***Exhaustiveness*** signifies the clarity and sufficiency of marks; ***boundaries***, the precision, that is, that there are no more of these than are required for the exhaustive concept; ***original***, however, that this boundary-determination is not derived from anywhere else and thus in need of a proof, which would make the supposed definition incapable of standing at the head of all judgments about an object.

[^***]: Philosophy is swarming with faulty definitions, especially those that actually contain elements for definition but are not yet complete. If one would not know what to do with a concept until one had defined it, then all philosophizing would be in a bad way. But since, however far the elements (of the analysis) reach, a good and secure use can always be made of them, even imperfect definitions, i.e., propositions that are not really definitions but are true and thus approximations to them, can be used with great advantage. In mathematics definitions belong _ad esse_, in philosophy _ad melius esse_. To arrive at them is beautiful, but often very difficult. Jurists are still searching for a definition of their concept of right.
