---
position: 106
label: "Of the impossibility of a skeptical satisfaction of pure reason in conflict with itself"
depth: 4
aa_page: 495
---

## {{ 786 }} Of the impossibility of a skeptical satisfaction of pure reason in conflict with itself

The consciousness of my ignorance (if this is not at the same time known to be necessary) should not end my inquiries, but is rather the proper cause to arouse them. All ignorance is either that of things or of the determination and boundaries of my cognition. Now if the ignorance is contingent, then in the first case it must drive me to investigate the things (objects) ***dogmatically,*** in the second case to investigate the boundaries of my possible cognition ***critically.*** But that my ignorance is absolutely necessary and hence absolves me from all further investigation can never be made out empirically, from ***observation,*** but only critically, by ***getting to the bottom of*** the primary sources of our cognition. Thus the determination of the boundaries of our reason can only take place in accordance with _a priori_ grounds; its limitation, however, which is a merely indeterminate cognition of an ignorance that is never completely to be lifted, can also be cognized _a posteriori_, through that which always remains to be known even with all of our knowledge. The former cognition of ignorance, which is possible only by means of the critique of reason itself, is thus ***science,*** the latter is nothing but ***perception,*** about which one cannot say how far the inference {{ 787 }} from it might reach. If I represent the surface of the earth (in accordance with sensible {{{ 496 }}} appearance) as a plate, I cannot know how far it extends. But experience teaches me this: that wherever I go, I always see a space around me in which I could proceed farther; thus I cognize the limits of my actual knowledge of the earth at any time, but not the boundaries of all possible description of the earth. But if I have gotten as far as knowing that the earth is a sphere and its surface the surface of a sphere, then from a small part of the latter, e.g., from the magnitude of one degree, I can cognize its diameter and, by means of this, the complete boundary, i.e., surface of the earth, determinately and in accordance with _a priori_ principles; and although I am ignorant in regard to the objects that this surface might contain, I am not ignorant in regard to the magnitude and limits of the domain that contains them.

The sum total of all possible objects for our cognition seems to us to be a flat surface, which has its apparent horizon, namely that which comprehends its entire domain and which is called by us the rational concept of unconditioned totality. It is impossible to attain this empirically, and all attempts to determine it _a priori_ in accordance with a certain principle have been in vain. Yet {{ 788 }} all questions of our pure reason pertain to that which might lie outside this horizon or in any case at least on its borderline.

The famous David Hume was one of these geographers of human reason, who took himself to have satisfactorily disposed of these questions by having expelled them outside the horizon of human reason, which however he could not determine. He dwelt primarily on the principle of causality, and quite rightly remarked about that that one could not base its truth (indeed not even the objective validity of the concept of an efficient cause in general) on any insight at all, i.e., _a priori_ cognition, and thus that the authority of this law is not constituted in the least by its necessity, but only by its merely general usefulness in the course of experience and a subjective necessity arising therefrom, which he called custom. Now from the incapacity of our reason to make a use of this principle that goes beyond all experience, he inferred the nullity of all pretensions of reason in general to go beyond the empirical.

{{{ 497 }}} One can call a procedure of this sort, subjecting the _Facta_ of reason to examination and when necessary to blame, the ***censorship*** of reason. It is beyond doubt that this censorship inevitably leads to ***doubt*** about all transcendent use of principles. {{ 789 }} But this is only the second step, which is far from completing the work. The first step in matters of pure reason, which characterizes its childhood, is ***dogmatic.*** The just mentioned second step is ***skeptical,*** and gives evidence of the caution of the power of judgment sharpened by experience. Now, however, a third step is still necessary, which pertains only to the mature and adult power of judgment, which has at its basis firm maxims of proven universality, that, namely, which subjects to evaluation not the _Facta_ of reason but reason itself, as concerns its entire capacity and suitability for pure _a priori_ cognitions; this is not the censorship but the ***critique*** of reason, whereby not merely ***limits*** but rather the determinate ***boundaries*** of it – not merely ignorance in one part or another but ignorance in regard to all possible questions of a certain sort – are not merely suspected but are proved from principles. Thus skepticism is a resting place for human reason, which can reflect upon its dogmatic peregrination and make a survey of the region in which it finds itself in order to be able to choose its path in the future with greater certainty, but it is not a dwelling-place for permanent residence; for the latter can only be found in a complete certainty, whether it be one of the cognition of the objects themselves or of the boundaries within which all of our cognition of objects is {{ 790 }} enclosed.

Our reason is not like an indeterminably extended plane, the limits of which one can cognize only in general, but must rather be compared with a sphere, the radius of which can be found out from the curvature of an arc on its surface (from the nature of synthetic _a priori_ propositions), from which its content and its boundary can also be ascertained with certainty. Outside this sphere (field of experience) nothing is an object for it; indeed even questions about such supposed objects concern only subjective principles of a thoroughgoing {{{ 498 }}} determination of the relations that can obtain among the concepts of understanding inside of this sphere.

We are really in possession of synthetic _a priori_ cognition, as is established by the principles of understanding, which anticipate experience. Now if someone cannot even make the possibility of these comprehensible to himself, he may certainly begin to doubt whether they are really present in us _a priori;_ but he cannot declare this to be an impossibility through the mere power of the understanding, and declare to be nugatory all of the steps that reason takes in accordance with their guidance. He can only say: If we had insight into their origin and authenticity, then we would be able to determine the domain and the boundaries of our reason; but {{ 791 }} until this has happened, all assertions of the latter are shots in the dark. And in such a way a thoroughgoing doubt of all dogmatic philosophy that goes its way without any critique of reason itself would be entirely well founded; yet reason cannot on that account be entirely denied such a progress, if it is prepared and secured through better groundwork. For one thing, all the concepts, indeed all the questions that pure reason lays before us, lie not in experience but themselves in turn only in reason, and they must therefore be able to be solved and their validity or nullity must be able to be comprehended. We are, also, not justified in repudiating these problems under the excuse of our incapacity, as if their solution really lay in the nature of things, and in rejecting further investigation, since reason has given birth to these ideas from its own womb alone, and is therefore liable to give account of either their validity or their dialectical illusion.

All skeptical polemicizing is properly directed only against the dogmatist, who continues gravely along his path without any mistrust of his original objective principles, i.e., without critique, in order to unhinge his concept and bring him to self-knowledge. In itself it settles nothing at all about what we can know and what by contrast we cannot know. All failed {{ 792 }} dogmatic attempts of reason are _Facta_, which it is always useful to subject to censure. But this cannot decide anything about reason’s expectations of hoping for better success in its future efforts and making claims to that; mere censure can therefore {{{ 499 }}} never bring to an end the controversy about what is lawful in human reason.

Since Hume is perhaps the most ingenious of all skeptics, and is incontrovertibly the preeminent one with regard to the influence that the skeptical procedure can have on awakening a thorough examination of reason, it is well worth the trouble to make clear, to the extent that is appropriate to my aim, the path of his inferences and the aberrations of such an insightful and valuable man, which nevertheless began on the trail of truth.

Hume perhaps had it in mind, although he never fully developed it, that in judgments of a certain kind we go beyond our concept of the object. I have called this sort of judgment ***synthetic.*** There is no difficulty about how, by means of experience, I can go beyond the concepts that I possess thus far. Experience is itself a synthesis of perceptions that augments my concept which I have by means of one perception by the addition of others. But we also believe ourselves to be able to go beyond our concepts _a priori_ and to amplify our cognition. {{ 793 }} We attempt to do this either through pure understanding, with regard to that which can at least be an ***object of experience,*** or even through pure reason, with regard to such properties of things, or even with regard to the existence of such objects, that can never come forth in experience. Our skeptic did not distinguish these two kinds of judgments, as he should have, and for that reason held this augmentation of concepts out of themselves and the parthenogenesis, so to speak, of our understanding (together with reason), without impregnation by experience, to be impossible; thus he held all of its supposedly _a priori_ principles to be merely imagined, and found that they are nothing but a custom arising from experience and its laws, thus are merely empirical, i.e., intrinsically contingent rules, to which we ascribe a supposed necessity and universality. However, for the assertion of this disturbing proposition he referred to the universally acknowledged principle of the relationship of cause to effect. Since in that case no faculty of understanding can lead us from the concept of a thing to the existence of something else which is thereby universally and necessarily given, he believed that he could infer from this that without experience we have nothing that could augment our concept {{{ 500 }}} and justify us in making such a judgment, which amplifies itself _a priori._ That the sunlight that illuminates the wax {{ 794 }} also melts it, though it hardens clay, understanding could not discover let alone lawfully infer from the concepts that we antecedently have of these things, and only experience could teach us such a law. In the transcendental logic, on the contrary, we have seen that although of course we can never ***immediately*** go beyond the content of the concept which is given to us, nevertheless we can still cognize the law of the connection with other things completely _a priori_, although in relation to a third thing, namely ***possible*** experience, but still _a priori._ Thus if wax that was previously firm melts, I can cognize _a priori_ that something must have preceded (e.g., the warmth of the sun) on which this has followed in accordance with a constant law, though without experience, to be sure, I could ***determinately*** cognize neither the cause from the effect nor the effect from the cause _a priori_ and without instruction from experience. He therefore falsely inferred from the contingency of our determination ***in accordance with the law*** the contingency of ***the law*** itself, and he confused going beyond the concept of a thing to possible experience (which takes place _a priori_ and constitutes the objective reality of the concept) with the synthesis of the objects of actual experience, which is of course always empirical; thereby, however, he made a principle of affinity, which has its seat in the understanding and asserts necessary connection, into a rule of association, which is found merely in the {{ 795 }} imitative imagination and which can present only contingent combinations, not objective ones at all.

The skeptical aberrations of this otherwise extremely acute man, however, arose primarily from a failing that he had in common with all dogmatists, namely, that he did not systematically survey all the kinds of _a priori_ synthesis of the understanding. For had he done so, he would have found, not to mention any others here, that e.g., ***the principle of persistence*** is one that anticipates experience just as much as that of causality. He would thereby have been able to mark out determinate boundaries for the understanding that expands itself _a priori_ and for pure reason. But since he merely ***limits*** our understanding without ***drawing boundaries*** for it, and brings about a general distrust but no determinate knowledge of the ignorance that is unavoidable for us, by censoring certain principles of the understanding {{{ 501 }}} without placing this understanding in regard to its entire capacity on the scales of critique, and, while rightly denying to understanding what it really cannot accomplish, goes further, and disputes all its capacity to expand itself _a priori_ without having assessed this entire capacity, the same thing happens to him that always brings down skepticism, namely, he is himself doubted, for his objections rest only on _Factis_, which are contingent, but not on principles that could effect a necessary renunciation of {{ 796 }} the right to dogmatic assertions.

Further, since he does not know the difference between the well founded claims of the understanding and the dialectical pretensions of reason, against which his attacks are chiefly directed, reason, whose entirely peculiar momentum is not in the least disturbed, but only hindered, does not feel that the room for its expansion is cut off, and although it is annoyed here and there it can never be entirely dissuaded from its efforts. For it is armed to parry attacks, and is all the more obstinate in attempting to carry out its demands. But a complete overview of its entire capacity and the conviction arising from that of the certainty of a small possession, even in case of the vanity of higher claims, put an end to all dispute, and move it to rest satisfied with a limited but undisputed property.

Against the uncritical dogmatist, who has not measured the sphere of his understanding and thus has not determined the boundaries of his possible cognition in accordance with principles, who therefore does not already know in advance how much he is capable of but thinks he can find it out through mere experiments, these skeptical attacks are not merely dangerous but are even disastrous. For if he is hit in a single assertion that he cannot justify or {{ 797 }} make plausible by means of principles, then suspicion falls upon all of them, however persuasive they might otherwise be.

And thus the skeptic is the taskmaster of the dogmatic sophist for a healthy critique of the understanding and of reason itself. When he has gotten this far he does not have to fear any further challenge, for he then distinguishes his possession from that which lies entirely outside it, to which he makes no claims and about which he cannot become involved in any controversies. Thus the skeptical procedure {{{ 502 }}} is not, to be sure, itself satisfying for questions of reason, but it is nevertheless preparatory for arousing its caution and showing it fundamental means for securing it in its rightful possessions.
