---
position: 109
label: "Chapter 2. The Canon of Pure Reason"
depth: 2
aa_page: 517
---

## {{{ 517 }}} {{ 823 }} Chapter 2. The Canon of Pure Reason

It is humbling for human reason that in its pure use it achieves nothing and even requires a discipline to rein in its extravagances and to prevent the illusions that befall it. Yet on the other hand this once again elevates reason and gives it a confidence in itself, that it can and must exercise this discipline of its own accord, without permitting any other censorship over itself; likewise that the boundaries it is compelled to set to its speculative use at the same time restrict the sophistical pretensions of every opponent, and can thereby secure against all attacks whatever might still remain to it of its formerly overblown demands. The greatest, and perhaps the only, utility that the entire philosophy of pure reason affords is thus in all likelihood merely negative: since it functions not as an organon for extension but as a discipline for fixing its limits, and, in place of uncovering truth, possesses only the unobtrusive merit of averting errors.

Yet there must, somewhere, be a wellspring of positive cognitions belonging within the province of pure reason, ones that perhaps {{ 824 }} occasion errors only by being misunderstood, though they truly make up the very aim of reason's zealous pursuit. For to what cause else should the insuppressible craving to gain a firm foothold somewhere entirely beyond the boundary of experience be ascribed? It has a presentiment of objects that carry with them a great interest of their own. To draw near to them it embarks on the route of mere speculation; but these take flight before it. Presumably better fortune is to be hoped for it upon the only path still left to it, namely that of ***practical*** use.

By a canon I mean the totality of the _a priori_ principles for the proper employment of certain faculties of cognition as such. Accordingly, general logic, in its analytic portion, amounts to a canon for the understanding and for reason as such, though merely with respect to form, since it leaves all content out of account. In the same way, the transcendental analytic proved to be the canon of the pure ***understanding***; for the understanding alone can achieve genuine synthetic cognitions _a priori_. Yet wherever no proper employment of a cognitive power {{{ 518 }}} is possible, no canon exists at all. Now, by every proof marshalled up to this point, pure ***reason*** in its speculative employment is wholly incapable of any synthetic cognition. There is therefore no canon whatever for its speculative employment (this being dialectical through and through); rather, in this regard the whole of transcendental logic is nothing more than discipline. {{ 825 }} Consequently, should there be anywhere a proper employment of pure reason — in which event a ***canon*** for it would likewise have to exist — such a canon will bear not on the speculative but on the ***practical use of reason***, which we accordingly now propose to examine.
