---
position: 111
label: "Section 2. Of the ideal of the highest good, as a determining ground of the ultimate end of pure reason"
depth: 3
aa_page: 522
---

## Section 2. Of the ideal of the highest good, as a determining ground of the ultimate end of pure reason

In its speculative use reason led us through the field of experiences, and, since it could never find complete satisfaction for itself there, it led us on from there to speculative ideas, which in the end, however, led us back again to experience, and thus fulfilled its aim in a way that is quite useful but not quite in accord with our expectation. Now yet another experiment remains open to us: namely, whether pure reason is also to be found in practical use, whether in that use it leads us to the ideas that attain the highest ends of pure reason which we have just adduced, and thus whether from the point of view of its practical interest reason may not be able to guarantee that which in regard to its speculative interest it entirely refuses to us.

All interest of my reason (the speculative as well as the practical) is united in the following three questions:
+ 1. What can I know? {{ 833 }}
+ 2. What should I do?
+ 3. What may I hope?

{{{ 523 }}} The first question is merely speculative. We have (as I flatter myself) already exhausted all possible replies to it, and finally found that with which reason must certainly satisfy itself and with which, if it does not look to the practical, it also has cause to be content; but from the two great ends to which this entire effort of pure reason was really directed we remain just as distant as if, out of a concern for comfort, we had declined this labor at the outset. If, therefore, the issue is knowledge, then this much at least is certain and settled, that we can never partake of knowledge with respect to those two problems.

The second question is merely practical. As such, to be sure, it can belong to pure reason, but in that case it is not transcendental, but moral, and thus it cannot be in itself a subject for our critique.

The third question, namely, “If I do what I should, what may I then hope?” is simultaneously practical and theoretical, so that the practical leads like a clue to a reply to the theoretical question and, in its highest form, the speculative question. For all ***hope*** concerns happiness, and with respect to the practical and the moral law it is the very same as what knowledge and the natural law is with regard to theoretical cognition {{ 834 }} of things. The former finally comes down to the inference that something ***is*** (which determines the ultimate final end) ***because something ought to happen;*** the latter, that something ***is*** (which acts as the supreme cause) ***because something does happen.***

Happiness is the satisfaction of all of our inclinations (_extensive_ with regard to their manifoldness, as well as _intensive_ with regard to degree, and also _protensive_ with regard to duration). The practical law from the motive of ***happiness*** I call pragmatic (rule of prudence); but that which is such that it has no other motive than the ***worthiness to be happy*** I call moral (moral law). The first advises us what to do if we want to partake of happiness; the second commands how we should behave in order even to be worthy of happiness. The first is grounded on empirical principles; for except by means of experience I can know neither which inclinations there are that would be satisfied, {{{ 524 }}} nor what the natural causes are that could satisfy them. The second abstracts from inclinations and natural means of satisfying them, and considers only the freedom of a rational being in general and the necessary conditions under which alone it is in agreement with the distribution of happiness in accordance with principles, and thus it at least ***can*** rest on mere ideas of pure reason and be cognized _a priori._

{{ 835 }} I assume that there are really pure moral laws, which determine completely _a priori_ (without regard to empirical motives, i.e., happiness) the action and omission, i.e., the use of the freedom of a rational being in general, and that these laws command ***absolutely*** (not merely hypothetically under the presupposition of other empirical ends), and are thus necessary in every respect. I can legitimately presuppose this proposition by appealing not only to the proofs of the most enlightened moralists but also to the moral judgment of every human being, if he will distincdy think such a law.

Pure reason thus contains – not in its speculative use, to be sure, but yet in a certain practical use, namely the moral use – principles of the ***possibility of experience,*** namely of those actions in conformity with moral precepts which ***could*** be encountered in the ***history*** of humankind. For since they command that these actions ought to happen, they must also be able to happen, and there must therefore be possible a special kind of systematic unity, namely the moral, whereas the systematic unity of nature ***in accordance with speculative principles*** of reason could not be proved, since reason has causality with regard to freedom in general but not with regard to the whole of nature, and moral principles of reason can produce free actions but not laws of nature. Thus the principles of {{ 836 }} pure reason have objective reality in their practical use, that is, in the moral use.

I call the world as it would be if it were in conformity with all moral laws (as it ***can*** be in accordance with the ***freedom*** of rational beings and ***should*** be in accordance with the necessary laws of ***morality***) a **moral world.** This is conceived thus far merely as an intelligible world, since abstraction is made therein from all conditions (ends) and even from all hindrances to morality in it (weakness or impurity of {{{ 525 }}} human nature). Thus far it is therefore a mere, yet practical, idea, which really can and should have its influence on the sensible world, in order to make it agree as far as possible with this idea. The idea of a moral world thus has objective reality, not as if it pertained to an object of an intelligible intuition (for we cannot even think of such a thing), but as pertaining to the sensible world, although as an object of pure reason in its practical use and a _corpus mysticum_ of the rational beings in it, insofar as their free choice under moral laws has thoroughgoing systematic unity in itself as well as with the freedom of everyone else.

This was the reply to the first of the two questions of pure reason that concern the practical interest: ***Do that through which*** {{ 837 }} ***you will become worthy to be happy***. Now the second question asks: Now if I behave so as not to be unworthy of happiness, how may I hope thereby to partake of it? For the answer to this question, the issue is whether the principles of pure reason that prescribe the law _a priori_ also necessarily connect this hope with it.

I say, accordingly, that just as the moral principles are necessary in accordance with reason in its ***practical*** use, it is equally necessary to assume in accordance with reason in its ***theoretical*** use that everyone has cause to hope for happiness in the same measure as he has made himself worthy of it in his conduct, and that the system of morality is therefore inseparably combined with the system of happiness, though only in the idea of pure reason.

Now in an intelligible world, i.e., in the moral world, in the concept of which we have abstracted from all hindrances to morality (of the inclinations), such a system of happiness proportionately combined with morality can also be thought as necessary, since freedom, partly moved and partly restricted by moral laws, would itself be the cause of the general happiness, and rational beings, under the guidance of such principles, would themselves be the authors of their own enduring welfare and at the same time that of others. But this system of self-rewarding morality {{ 838 }} is only an idea, the realization of which rests {{{ 526 }}} on the condition that ***everyone*** do what he should, i.e., that all actions of rational beings occur as if they arose from a highest will that comprehends all private choice in or under itself. But since the obligation from the moral law remains valid for each particular use of freedom even if others do not conduct themselves in accord with this law, how their consequences will be related to happiness is determined neither by the nature of the things in the world, nor by the causality of actions themselves and their relation to morality; and the necessary connection of the hope of being happy with the unremitting effort to make oneself worthy of happiness that has been adduced cannot be cognized through reason if it is grounded merely in nature, but may be hoped for only if it is at the same time grounded on a ***highest reason,*** which commands in accordance with moral laws, as at the same time the cause of nature.

I call the idea of such an intelligence, in which the morally most perfect will, combined with the highest blessedness, is the cause of all happiness in the world, insofar as it stands in exact relation with morality (as the worthiness to be happy), ***the ideal of the highest good.*** Thus only in the ideal of the highest ***original*** good can pure reason find the ground of the practically necessary connection of {{ 839 }} both elements of the highest derived good, namely of an intelligible, i.e., ***moral*** world. Now since we must necessarily represent ourselves through reason as belonging to such a world, although the senses do not present us with anything except a world of appearances, we must assume the moral world to be a consequence of our conduct in the sensible world; and since the latter does not offer such a connection to us, we must assume the former to be a world that is future for us. Thus God and a future life are two presuppositions that are not to be separated from the obligation that pure reason imposes on us in accordance with principles of that very same reason.

Morality in itself constitutes a system, but happiness does not, except insofar as it is distributed precisely in accordance with morality. This, however, is possible only in the intelligible world, under a wise author and regent. Reason sees itself as compelled either to assume such a thing, together with life in such a world, which we must regard as a future one, or else to regard the moral laws as empty figments of the brain, since without that presupposition their necessary success, which the same {{{ 527 }}} reason connects with them, would have to disappear. Hence everyone also regards the moral laws as ***commands,*** which, however, they could not be if they did not connect appropriate consequences with their rule _a priori,_ and thus carry {{ 840 }} with them ***promises*** and ***threats.*** This, however, they could not do if they did not lie in a necessary being, as the highest good, which alone can make possible such a purposive unity.

Leibniz called the world, insofar as in it one attends only to rational beings and their interconnection in accordance with moral laws under the rule of the highest good, the ***realm of grace,*** and distinguished it from the ***realm of nature,*** where, to be sure, rational beings stand under moral laws but cannot expect any successes for their conduct except in accordance with the course of nature in our sensible world. Thus to regard ourselves as in the realm of grace, where every happiness awaits us as long as we do not ourselves limit our share of it through the unworthiness to be happy, is a practically necessary idea of reason.

Practical laws, insofar as they are at the same time subjective grounds of actions, i.e., subjective principles, are called ***maxims.*** The ***judgment*** of morality concerning its purity and consequences takes place in accordance with ***ideas,*** the ***observance*** of its laws, in accordance with ***maxims.***

It is necessary that our entire course of life be subordinated to moral maxims; but it would at the same time be impossible for this to happen if reason did not connect with the moral law, which is a mere idea, an efficient cause which determines for the conduct in accord with this law an outcome precisely corresponding to our highest ends, whether in {{ 841 }} this or in another life. Thus without a God and a world that is now not visible to us but is hoped for, the majestic ideas of morality are, to be sure, objects of approbation and admiration but not incentives for resolve and realization, because they would not fulfill the whole end that is natural for every rational being and determined _a priori_ and necessarily through the very same pure reason.

Happiness alone is far from the complete good for our reason. Reason does not approve of it (however much inclination may wish for it) where it is not united with the worthiness to be happy, i.e., with morally good conduct. Yet morality alone, and with it, the mere ***worthiness*** to be happy, is also far from being the {{{ 528 }}} complete good. In order to complete the latter, he who has not conducted himself so as to be unworthy of happiness must be able to hope to partake of it. Even reason free from all private aims cannot judge otherwise if, without taking into account an interest of its own, it puts itself in the place of a being who would have to distribute all happiness to others; for in the practical idea both elements are essentially combined, though in such a way that the moral disposition, as a condition, first makes partaking in happiness possible, rather than the prospect of happiness first making possible the moral disposition. For in the latter case the disposition would not be {{ 842 }} moral and would therefore also be unworthy of complete happiness, which knows no other limitation before reason except that which is derived from our own immoral conduct.

Thus happiness in exact proportion with the morality of rational beings, through which they are worthy of it, alone constitutes the highest good of a world into which we must without exception transpose ourselves in accordance with the precepts of pure but practical reason, and which, of course, is only an intelligible world, since the sensible world does not promise us that sort of systematic unity of ends, the reality of which can be grounded on nothing other than the presupposition of a highest original good, since self-sufficient reason, armed with all of the sufficiency of a supreme cause, in accordance with the most perfect purposiveness, grounds, conserves and completes the order of things that is universal though well hidden from us in the sensible world.

Now this moral theology has the peculiar advantage over the speculative one that it inexorably leads to the concept of a ***single, most perfect***, and ***rational*** primordial being, of which speculative theology could not on objective grounds give us even a ***hint***, let alone ***convince*** us. For neither in speculative nor in natural theology, as far as reason may lead us, do we find even a single significant ground for assuming a single being {{ 843 }} to set before all natural causes, on which we would at the same time have sufficient cause to make the latter dependent in every way. On the contrary, if, from the standpoint of moral unity, we assess the cause that can alone provide this with the appropriate effect and thus obligating force for us, as a necessary law of the world, then there must be a single supreme will, which comprehends all these laws {{{ 529 }}} in itself. For how would we find complete unity of purposes among different wills? This will must be omnipotent, so that all of nature and its relation to morality in the world are subject to it; omniscient, so that it cognizes the inmost dispositions and their moral worth; omnipresent, so that it is immediately ready for every need that is demanded by the highest good for the world; eternal, so that this agreement of nature and freedom is not lacking at any time, etc.

But this systematic unity of ends in this world of intelligences, which, though as mere nature it can only be called the sensible world, as a system of freedom can be called an intelligible, i.e., moral world (_regnum gratiae_), also leads inexorably to the purposive unity of all things that constitute this great whole, in accordance with universal laws of nature, just as the first does in accordance with universal and necessary moral laws, and unifies practical with speculative reason. The world must {{ 844 }} be represented as having arisen out of an idea if it is to be in agreement with that use of reason without which we would hold ourselves unworthy of reason, namely the moral use, which depends throughout on the idea of the highest good. All research into nature is thereby directed toward the form of a system of ends, and becomes, in its fullest extension, physico-theology. This, however, since it arises from moral order as a unity which is grounded in the essence of freedom and not contingently founded through external commands, brings the purposiveness of nature down to grounds that must be inseparably connected _a priori_ to the inner possibility of things, and thereby leads to a ***transcendental theology*** that takes the ideal of the highest ontological perfection as a principle of systematic unity, which connects all things in accordance with universal and necessary laws of nature, since they all have their origin in the absolute necessity of a single original being.

What sort of ***use*** can we make of our understanding, even in regard to experience, if we do not set ends before ourselves? The highest ends, however, are those of morality, and only pure reason can grant us cognition of these. But though equipped and guided with these, we still cannot even make any purposive use of our acquaintance with nature for cognition unless nature {{ 845 }} itself has introduced purposive unity; {{{ 530 }}} for without this we would not even have any reason, since we would have no school for it and no culture through objects that would offer the material for such concepts. That purposive unity is necessary, however, and grounded in the essence of the faculty of choice itself, and therefore this one, which contains the condition of the application of that unity _in concreto_, must also be necessary, and thus the transcendental improvement of our rational cognition is not the cause but rather merely the effect of the practical purposiveness which pure reason imposes on us.

Hence we also find in the history of human reason that before the moral concepts were adequately purified and determined and the systematic unity of purposes was understood in accordance with them and from necessary principles, the knowledge of nature and even a considerable degree of culture of reason in many other sciences could, on the one hand, produce only rudimentary and vague concepts of the deity, and, on the other, leave a remarkable indifference with regard to this question in general. A greater refinement of moral ideas, which was made necessary by the extremely pure moral law of our religion, made reason attend more sharply to its object by means of the interest that it required reason to take in this object, and, without a contribution from either more ample acquaintance with nature or correct and reliable transcendental insights (which {{ 846 }} have been lacking at all times), produced a concept of the divine being that we now hold to be correct, not because speculative reason convinces us of its correctness but because it is in perfect agreement with the moral principles of reason. And thus, in the end, only pure reason, although only in its practical use, always has the merit of connecting with our highest interest a cognition that mere speculation can only imagine but never make valid, and of thereby making it into not a demonstrated dogma but yet an absolutely necessary presupposition for reason’s most essential ends.

But now when practical reason has attained this high point, namely the concept of a single original being as the highest good, it must not undertake to start out from this concept {{{ 531 }}} and derive the moral laws themselves from it, as if it had elevated itself above all empirical conditions of its application and soared up to an immediate acquaintance with new objects. For it was these laws alone whose ***inner*** practical necessity led us to the presupposition of a self-sufficient cause or a wise world-regent, in order to give effect to these laws, and hence we cannot in turn regard these as contingent and derived from a mere will, especially {{ 847 }} from a will of which we would have had no concept at all had we not formed it in accordance with those laws. So far as practical reason has the right to lead us, we will not hold actions to be obligatory because they are God’s commands, but will rather regard them as divine commands because we are internally obligated to them. We will study freedom under the purposive unity in accordance with principles of reason, and will believe ourselves to be in conformity with the divine will only insofar as we hold as holy the moral law that reason teaches us from the nature of actions themselves, believing ourselves to serve this divine will only through furthering what is best for the world in ourselves and others. Moral theology is therefore only of immanent use, namely for fulfilling our vocation here in the world by fitting into the system of all ends, not for fanatically or even impiously abandoning the guidance of a morally legislative reason in the good course of life in order to connect it immediately to the idea of the highest being, which would provide a transcendent use but which even so, like the use of mere speculation, must pervert and frustrate the ultimate ends of reason.
