---
position: 2
label: "Book II"
depth: 1
---
## BOOK II.

## THE ARGUMENT.

The Conſultation begun, *Satan* debates whether another Battel be to be hazarded for the recovery of Heaven: ſome adviſe it, others diſſuade: A third propoſal is prefer'd, mention'd before by *Satan,* to ſearch the truth of that Propheſie or Tradition in Heaven concerning another world, and another kind of creature equal or not much inferiour to themſelves, about this time to be created: Thir doubt who ſhall be ſent on this difficult ſearch: *Satan* thir chief undertakes alone the voyage, is honourd and applauded. The Councel thus ended, the rest betake them ſeveral wayes and to ſeveral imployments, as thir inclinations lead them, to entertain the time till *Satan* return. He paſſes on his Journey to Hell Gates, finds them ſhut, and who ſat there to guard them, by whom at length they are op'nd, and diſcover to him the great Gulf between Hell and Heaven; with what difficulty he paſſes through, directed by *Chaos,* the Power of that place, to the ſight of this new World which he ſought.

HIgh on a Throne of Royal State, which far
Outſhon the wealth of *Ormus* and of *Ind,*
Or where the gorgeous Eaſt with richeſt hand
Showrs on her Kings *Barbaric* Pearl and Gold,
Satan exalted ſat, by merit rais'd
To that bad eminence; and from deſpair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aſpires
Beyond thus high, inſatiate to purſue
Vain Warr with Heav'n, and by ſucceſs untaught
His proud imaginations thus diſplaid.

Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heav'n,
For ſince no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigor, though oppreſt and fall'n,
I give not Heav'n for loſt. From this deſcent
Celeſtial vertues riſing, will appear
More glorious and more dread then from no fall,
And truſt themſelves to fear no ſecond fate:
Mee though juſt right, and the fixt Laws of Heav'n
Did firſt create your Leader, next free choice,
With what beſides, in Counſel or in Fight,
Hath bin achievd of merit, yet this loſs
Thus farr at leaſt recover'd, hath much more
Eſtabliſht in a ſafe unenvied Throne
Yielded with full conſent. The happier ſtate
In Heav'n, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the higheſt place expoſes
For moſt to ſtand againſt the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greateſt ſhare
Of endleſs pain? where there is then no good
For which to ſtrive, no ſtrife can grow up there
From Faction; for none ſure will claim in Hell
Precedence, none, whoſe portion is ſo ſmall
Of preſent pain, that with ambitious mind
Will covet more. With this advantage then
To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord,
More then can be in Heav'n, we now return
To claim our juſt inheritance of old,
Surer to proſper then proſperity
Could have aſſur'd us; and by what beſt way,
Whether of open Warr or covert guile,
We now debate; who can adviſe, may ſpeak,

He ceas'd, and next him *Moloc,* Scepter'd King
Stood up, the ſtrongeſt and the fierceſt Spirit
That fought in Heav'n; now fiercer by deſpair:
His truſt was with th' Eternal to be deem'd
Equal in ſtrength, and rather then be leſs
Car'd not to be at all; with that care loſt
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worſe
He reck'd not, and theſe words thereafter ſpake.

My ſentence is for open Warr: Of Wiles,
More unexpert, I boaſt not: them let thoſe
Contrive who need, or when they need, not now
For while they ſit contriving, ſhall the reſt,
Millions that ſtand in Arms, and longing wait
The Signal to aſcend, ſit lingring here
Heav'ns fugitives, and for thir dwelling place
Accept this dark opprobrious Den of ſhame,
The Priſon of his Tyranny who Reigns
By our delay? no, let us rather chooſe
Arm'd with Hell flames and fury all at once
O're Heav'ns high Towrs to force reſiſtleſs way,
Turning our Torturer into horrid Arms
Againſt the Torturer; when to meet the noiſe
Of his Almighty Engin he ſhall hear
Infernal Thunder, and for Lightning ſee
Black fire and horror ſhot with equal rage
Among his Angels; and his Throne it ſelf
Mixt with *Tartarean* Sulphur, and ſtrange fire,
His own invented Torments. But perhaps
The way ſeems difficult and ſteep to ſcale
With upright wing againſt a higher foe.
Let ſuch bethink them, if the ſleepy drench
Of that forgetful Lake benumm not ſtill,
That in our proper motion we aſcend
Up to our native ſeat: deſcent and fall
To us is adverſe. Who but felt of late
When the fierce Foe hung on our brok'n Rear
Inſulting, and purſu'd us through the Deep,
With what compulſion and laborious flight
We ſunk thus low? Th' aſcent is eaſie then;
Th' event is fear'd; ſhould we again provoke
Our ſtronger, ſome worſe way his wrath may find
To our deſtruction: if there be in Hell
Fear to be worſe deſtroy'd: what can be worſe
Then to dwell here, driv'n out from bliſs, condemn'd
In this abhorred deep to utter woe;
Where pain of unextinguiſhable fire
Muſt exerciſe us without hope of end
The Vaſſals of his anger, when the Scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing hour
Calls us to Penance? More deſtroy'd then thus
We ſhould be quite aboliſht and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incenſe
His utmoſt ire? which to the highth enrag'd,
Will either quite conſume us, and reduce
To nothing this eſſential, happier farr
Then miſerable to have eternal being:
Or if our ſubſtance be indeed Divine,
And cannot ceaſe to be, we are at worſt
On this ſide nothing; and by proof we feel
Our power ſufficient to diſturb his Heav'n,
And with perpetual inrodes to Allarme,
Though inacceſſible, his fatal Throne:
VVhich if not Victory is yet Revenge.

He ended frowning, and his look denounc'd
Deſperate revenge, and Battel dangerous
To leſs then Gods. On th' other ſide up roſe
*Belial,* in act more graceful and humane;
A fairer perſon loſt not Heav'n; he ſeemd
For dignity compos'd and high exploit:
But all was falſe and hollow; though his Tongue
Dropt Manna, and could make the worſe appear
The better reaſon, to perplex and daſh
Matureſt Counſels: for his thoughts were low;
To vice induſtrious, but to Nobler deeds
Timorous and ſlothful: yet he pleas'd the ear,
And with perſwaſive accent thus began.

I ſhould be much for open VVarr, O Peers,
As not behind in hate; if what was urg'd
Main reaſon to perſwade immediate VVarr,
Did not diſſwade me moſt, and ſeem to caſt
Ominous conjecture on the whole ſucceſs:
VVhen he who moſt excels in fact of Arms,
In what he counſels and in what excels
Miſtruſtful, grounds his courage on deſpair
And utter diſſolution, as the ſcope
Of all his aim, after ſome dire revenge.
Firſt, what Revenge? the Towrs of Heav'n are fill'd
VVith Armed watch, that render all acceſs
Impregnable; oft on the bordering Deep
Encamp thir Legions, or with obſcure wing
Scout farr and wide into the Realm of night,
Scorning ſurprize. Or could we break our way
By force, and at our heels all Hell ſhould riſe
VVith blackeſt Inſurrection, to confound
Heav'ns pureſt, Light, yet our great Enemy
All incorruptible would on his Throne
Sit unpolluted, and th' Ethereal mould
Incapable of ſtain would ſoon expel
Her miſchief, and purge off the baſer fire
Victorious. Thus repuls'd, our final hope
Is flat deſpair: we muſt exaſperate
Th' Almighty Victor to ſpend all his rage,
And that muſt end us, that muſt be our cure,
To be no more; ſad cure; for who would looſe,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Thoſe thoughts that wander through Eternity,
To periſh rather, ſwallowd up and loſt
In the wide womb of uncreated night,
Devoid of ſenſe and motion? and who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? how he can
Is doubtful; that he never will is ſure.
VVill he, ſo wiſe, let looſe at once his ire,
Belike through impotence, or unaware,
To give his Enemies thir wiſh, and end
Them in his anger, whom his anger ſaves
To puniſh endleſs? wherefore ceaſe we then?
Say they who counſel VVarr, we are decreed,
Reſerv'd and deſtin'd to Eternal woe;
VVhatever doing, what can we ſuffer more,
VVhat can we ſuffer worſe? is this then worſt,
Thus ſitting, thus conſulting, thus in Arms?
VVhat when we fled amain, purſu'd and ſtrook
VVith Heav'ns afflicting Thunder, and beſought
The Deep to ſhelter us? this Hell then ſeem'd
A refuge from thoſe wounds: or when we lay
Chain'd on the burning Lake? that ſure was worſe.
VVhat if the breath that kindl'd thoſe grim fires
Awak'd ſhould blow them into ſevenfold rage
And plunge us in the flames? or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? what if all
Her ſtores were open'd, and this Firmament
Of Hell ſhould ſpout her Cataracts of Fire,
Impendent horrors, threatning hideous fall
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps
Deſigning or exhorting glorious warr,
Caught in a fierie Tempeſt ſhall be hurl'd
Each on his rock transfixt, the ſport and prey
Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever ſunk
Under yon boyling Ocean, wrapt in Chains;
There to converſe with everlaſting groans,
Unreſpited, unpitied, unrepreevd,
Ages of hopeleſs end; this would be worſe.
VVarr therefore, open or conceal'd, alike
My voice diſſwades; for what can force or guile
VVith him, or who deceive his mind, whoſe eye
Views all things at one view? he from heav'ns highth
All theſe our motions vain, ſees and derides;
Not more Almighty to reſiſt our might
Then wiſe to fruſtrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we then live thus vile, the Race of Heav'n
Thus trampl'd, thus expell'd to ſuffer here
Chains and theſe Torments? better theſe then worſe
By my advice; ſince fate inevitable
Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree,
The Victors will. To ſuffer, as to doe,
Our ſtrength is equal, nor the Law unjuſt
That ſo ordains: this was at firſt reſolv'd;
If we were wiſe, againſt ſo great a foe
Contending, and ſo doubtful what might fall.
I laugh, when thoſe who at the Spear are bold
And vent'rous, if that fail them, ſhrink and fear
VVhat yet they know muſt follow, to endure
Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,
The ſentence of thir Conquerour: This is now
Our doom; which if we can ſuſtain and bear,
Our Supream Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps thus farr remov'd
Not mind us not offending, ſatisfi'd
VVith what is puniſh't; whence theſe raging fires
VVill ſlack'n, if his breath ſtir not thir flames.
Our purer eſſence then will overcome
Thir noxious vapour, or enur'd not feel,
Or chang'd at length, and to the place conformd
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain;
This horror will grow milde, this darkneſs light,
Beſides what hope the never-ending flight
Of future dayes may bring, what chance, what change
VVorth waiting, ſince our preſent lot appeers
For happy though but ill, for ill not worſt,
If we procure not to our ſelves more woe.

Thus *Belial* words cloath'd in reaſons garb
Counſel'd ignoble eaſe, and peaceful ſloath,
Not peace: and after him thus *Mammon* ſpake.

Either to diſinthrone the King of Heav'n
VVe warr, if warr be beſt, or to regain
Our own right loſt: him to unthrone we then
May hope when everlaſting Fate ſhall yeild
To fickle Chance, and *Chaos* judge the ſtrife:
The former vain to hope argues as vain
The latter: for what place can be for us
VVithin Heav'ns bound, unleſs Heav'ns Lord ſupream
VVe overpower? Suppoſe he ſhould relent
And publiſh Grace to all, on promiſe made
Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we
Stand in his preſence humble, and receive
Strict Laws impos'd, to celebrate his Throne
VVith warbl'd Hymns, and to his Godhead ſing
Forc't Halleluiah's; while he Lordly ſits
Our envied Sovran, and his Altar breathes
Ambroſial Odours and Ambroſial Flowers,
Our ſervile offerings. This muſt be our task
In Heav'n this our delight; how weariſom
Eternity ſo ſpent in worſhip paid
To whom we hate. Let us not then purſue
By force impoſſible, by leave obtain'd
Unacceptable, though in Heav'n, our ſtate
Of ſplendid vaſſalage, but rather ſeek
Our own good from our ſelves, and from our own
Live to our ſelves, though in this vaſt receſs,
Free, and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the eaſie yoke
Of ſervile Pomp. Our greatneſs will appeer
Then moſt conſpicuous, when great things of ſmall,
Uſeful of hurtful, proſperous of adverſe
We can create, and in what place ſo e're
Thrive under evil, and work eaſe out of pain
Through labour and indurance. This deep world
Of darkneſs do we dread? How oft amidſt
Thick clouds and dark doth Heav'ns all-ruling Sire
Chooſe to reſide, his Glory unobſcur'd,
And with the Majeſty of darkneſs round
Covers his Throne; from whence deep thunders roar
Muſt'ring thir rage, and Heav'n reſembles Hell?
As he our darkneſs, cannot we his Light
Imitate when we pleaſe? This Deſart ſoile
VVants not her hidden luſtre, Gemms and Gold;
Nor want we skill or Art, from whence to raiſe
Magnificence; and what can Heav'n ſhew more?
Our torments alſo may in length of time
Become our Elements, theſe piercing Fires
As ſoft as now ſevere, our temper chang'd
Into their temper; which muſt needs remove
The ſenſible of pain. All things invite
To peaceful Counſels, and the ſettl'd State
Of order, how in ſafety beſt we may
Compoſe our preſent evils, with regard
Of what we are and were, diſmiſſing quite
All thoughts of warr: ye have what I adviſe.

He ſcarce had finiſht, when ſuch murmur filld
Th' Aſſembly, as when hollow Rocks retain
The ſound of bluſtring winds, which all night long
Had rous'd the Sea, now with hoarſe cadence lull
Sea-faring men orewatcht, whoſe Bark by chance
Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay
After the Tempeſt: Such applauſe was heard
As *Mammon* ended, and his Sentence pleas'd,
Adviſing peace: for ſuch another Field
They dreaded worſe then Hell: ſo much the fear
Of Thunder and the Sword of *Michael*
VVrought ſtill within them; and no leſs deſire
To found this nether Empire, which might riſe
By pollicy, and long proceſs of time,
In emulation oppoſite to Heav'n.
VVhich when *Beelzebub* perceiv'd, then whom,
*Satan* except, none higher ſat, with grave
Aſpect he roſe, and in his riſing ſeem'd
A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven
Deliberation ſat and public care;
And Princely counſel in his face yet ſhon,
Majeſtic though in ruin: ſage he ſtood
With *Atlantean* ſhoulders fit to bear
The weight of mightieſt Monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention ſtill as Night
Or Summers Noon-tide air, while thus he ſpake.

Thrones and Imperial Powers, off-ſpring of heav'n
Ethereal Vertues; or theſe Titles now
Muſt we renounce, and changing ſtile be call'd
Princes of Hell? for ſo the popular vote
Inclines, here to continue, and build up here
A growing Empire; doubtleſs; while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heav'n hath doom'd
This place our dungeon, not our ſafe retreat
Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt
From Heav'ns high jurisdiction, in new League
Banded againſt his Throne, but to remaine
In ſtricteſt bondage, though thus far remov'd,
Under th' inevitable curb, reſerv'd
His captive multitude: For he, be ſure
In heighth or depth, ſtill firſt and laſt will Reign
Sole King, and of his Kingdom looſe no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His Empire, and with Iron Scepter rule
Us here, as with his Golden thoſe in Heav'n.
What ſit we then projecting peace and Warr?
VVarr hath determin'd us, and foild with loſs
Irreparable; tearms of peace yet none
Voutſaf't or ſought; for what peace will be giv'n
To us enſlav'd, but cuſtody ſevere,
And ſtripes, and arbitrary puniſhment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But to our power hoſtility and hate,
Untam'd reluctance, and revenge though ſlow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror leaſt
May reap his conqueſt, and may leaſt rejoyce
In doing what we moſt in ſuffering feel?
Nor will occaſion want, nor ſhall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heav'n, whoſe high walls fear no aſſault or Siege,
Or ambuſh from the Deep. What if we find
Some eaſier enterprize? There is a place
(if ancient and prophetic fame in Heav'n
Err not) another World, the happy ſeat
Of ſome new Race call'd *Man,* about this time
To be created like to us, though leſs
In power and excellence, but favour'd more
Of him who rules above; ſo was his will
Pronounc'd among the Gods, and by an Oath,
That ſhook Heav'ns whol circumference, confirm'd.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould,
Or ſubſtance, how endu'd, and what thir Power,
And where thir weakneſs, how attempted beſt,
By force or ſuttlety: Though Heav'n be ſhut,
And Heav'ns high Arbitrator ſit ſecure
In his own ſtrength, this place may lye expos'd
The utmoſt border of his Kingdom, left
To their defence who hold it: here perhaps
Som advantagious act may be achiev'd
By ſudden onſet, either with Hell fire
To waſte his whole Creation, or poſſeſs
All as our own, and drive as we were driven,
The punie habitants, or if not drive,
Seduce them to our Party, that thir God
May prove thir foe, and with repenting hand
Aboliſh his own works. This would ſurpaſs
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our Confuſion, and our Joy upraiſe
In his diſturbance; when his darling Sons
Hurl'd headlong to partake with us, ſhall curſe
Thir frail Original, and faded bliſs,
Faded ſo ſoon. Adviſe if this be worth
Attempting, or to ſit in darkneſs here
Hatching vain Empires. Thus *Beelzebub*
Pleaded his deviliſh Counſel, firſt devis'd
By *Satan,* and in part propos'd: for whence,
But from the Author of all ill could Spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to ſpite
The great Creatour? But thir ſpite ſtill ſerves
His glory to augment. The bold deſign
Pleas'd highly thoſe infernal States, and joy
Sparkl'd in all thir eyes; with full aſſent
They vote: whereat his ſpeech he thus renews.

Well have ye judg'd, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are,
Great things reſolv'd, which from the loweſt deep
Will once more lift us up, in ſpight of Fate,
Neerer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view
Of thoſe bright confines, whence with neighbouring Arms
And opportune excurſion we may chance
Re-enter Heav'n; or elſe in ſome milde Zone
Dwell not unviſited of Heav'ns fair Light
Secure, and at the brightning Orient beam
Purge off this gloom; the ſoft delicious Air,
To heal the ſcarr of theſe corroſive Fires
Shall breathe her balme. But firſt whom ſhall we ſend
In ſearch of this new world, whom ſhall we find
Sufficient? who ſhall tempt with wandring feet
The dark unbottom'd infinite Abyſs
And through the palpable obſcure find out
His uncouth way, or ſpread his aerie flight
Upborn with indefatigable wings
Over the vaſt abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy Ile; what ſtrength, what art can then
Suffice, or what evaſion bear him ſafe
Through the ſtrict Senteries and Stations thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumſpection, and we now no leſs
Choice in our ſuffrage; for on whom we ſend,
The weight of all and our laſt hope relies.

This ſaid, he ſat; and expectation held
His look ſuſpence, awaiting who appeer'd
To ſecond, or oppoſe, or undertake
The perilous attempt: but all ſat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each
In others count'nance read his own diſmay
Aſtoniſht: none among the choice and prime
Of thoſe Heav'n-warring Champions could be found
So hardie as to proffer or accept
Alone the dreadful voyage; till at laſt
*Satan,* whom now tranſcendent glory rais'd
Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride
Conſcious of higheſt worth, unmov'd thus ſpake.

O Progeny of Heav'n, Empyreal Thrones,
With reaſon hath deep ſilence and demurr
Seis'd us, though undiſmaid: long is the way
And hard, that opt of Hell leads up to light;
Our priſon ſtrong, this huge convex of Fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant
Barr'd over us prohibit all egreſs.
Theſe paſt, if any paſs, the void profound
Of uneſſential Night receives him next
Wide gaping, and with utter loſs of being
Threatens him, plung'd in that abortive gulf.
If thence he ſcape into whatever world,
Or unknown Region, what remains him leſs
Then unknown dangers and as hard eſcape.
But I ſhould ill become this Throne, O Peers,
And this Imperial Sov'ranty, adorn'd
With ſplendor, arm'd with power, if aught propos'd
And judg'd of public moment, in the ſhape
Of difficulty or danger could deterr
Mee from attempting. Wherefore do I aſſume
Theſe Royalties, and not refuſe to Reign,
Refuſing to accept as great a ſhare
Of hazard as of honour, due alike
To him who Reigns, and ſo much to him due
Of hazard more, as he above the reſt
High honourd ſits? Go therfore mighty Powers,
Terror of Heav'n, though fall'n; intend at home,
While here ſhall be our home, what beſt may eaſe
The preſent miſery, and render Hell
More tollerable; if there be cure or charm
To reſpite or deceive, or ſlack the pain
Of this ill Manſion: intermit no watch
Againſt a wakeful Foe, while I abroad
Through all the Coaſts of dark deſtruction ſeek
Deliverance for us all: this enterprize
None ſhall partake with me. Thus ſaying roſe
The Monarch, and prevented all reply,
Prudent, leaſt from his reſolution rais'd
Others among the chief might offer now
(Certain to be refus'd) what erſt they feard;
And ſo refus'd might in opinion ſtand
His Rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge muſt earn. But they
Dreaded not more th' adventure then his voice
Forbidding; and at once with him they roſe;
Thir riſing all at once was as the ſound
Of Thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend
With awful reverence prone; and as a God
Extoll him equal to the higheſt in Heav'n:
Nor fail'd they to expreſs how much they prais'd,
That for the general ſafety he deſpis'd
His own: for neither do the Spirits damn'd
Looſe all her virtue; leaſt bad men ſhould boaſt
Thir specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or cloſ ambition varniſht o're with zeal.
Thus they thir doubtful conſultations dark
Ended rejoycing in thir matchleſs Chief:
As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds
Aſcending, while the North wind ſleeps, o'reſpread
Heav'ns chearful face, the lowring Element
Scowls ore the dark'nd lantskip Snow, or ſhowre;
If chance the radiant Sun with farewell ſweet
Extend his ev'ning beam, the fields revive,
The birds thir notes renew, and bleating herds
Atteſt thir joy, that hill and valley rings.
O ſhame to men! Devil with Devil damn'd
Firm concord holds, men onely diſagree
Of Creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and ſtrife
Among themſelves, and levie cruel warres,
Waſting the Earth, each other to deſtroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not helliſh foes a now beſides,
That day and night for his deſtruction waite.

The *Stygian* Counſel thus diſſolv'd; and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers,
Midſt came thir mighty Paramount, and ſeemd
Alone th' Antagoniſt of Heav'n, nor leſs
Than Hells dread Emperour with pomp Supream,
And God-like imitated State; him round
A Globe of fierie Seraphim inclos'd
With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms.
Then of thir Seſſion ended they bid cry
With Trumpets regal ſound the great reſult:
Toward the four winds four ſpeedy Cherubim
Put to thir mouths the ſounding Alchymie
By Haralds voice explain'd: the hollow Abyſs
Heard farr and wide, and all the hoſt of Hell
With deafning ſhout, return'd them loud acclaim.
Thence more at eaſe thir minds and ſomwhat rais'd
By falſe preſumptuous hope, the ranged powers
Disband, and wandring, each his ſeveral way
Purſues, as inclination or ſad choice
Leads him perplext, where he may likelieſt find
Truce to his reſtleſs thoughts, and entertain
The irkſom hours, till this great Chief return.
Part on the Plain, or in the Air ſublime
Upon the wing, or in ſwift Rare contend,
As at th' Olympian Games or *Pythian* fields;
Part curb thir fierie Steeds, or ſhun the Goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads form.
As when to warn proud Cities warr appears
Wag'd in the troubl'd Skie, and Armies ruſh
To Battel in the Clouds, before each Van
Prick forth the Aerie Knights, and couch thir Spears
Till thickeſt Legions cloſe; with feats of Arms
From either end of Heav'n the welkin burns.
Others with vaſt *Typhoean* rage more fell
Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air
In whirlwind; Hell ſcarce holds the wilde uproar.
As when *Alcides* from *Oechalia* Crown'd
With conqueſt, felt th' envenom'd robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots *Theſſalian* Pines,
And *Lichas* from the top of *Oeta* threw
Into th' *Euboic* Sea. Others more milde,
Retreated in a ſilent valley, ſing
With notes Angelical to many a Harp
Thir own Heroic deeds and hapleſs fall
By doom of Battel; and complain that Fate
Free Vertue ſhould enthrall to Force or Chance.
Thir Song was partial, but the harmony
(What could it leſs when Spirits immortal ſing?)
Suſpended Hell, and took with raviſhment
The thronging audience. In diſcourſe more ſweet
(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Senſe,)
Others apart ſat on a Hill retir'd,
In thoughts more elevate, and reaſon'd high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate,
Fixt Fate, free will, foreknowledg abſolute,
And found no end, in wandring mazes loſt.
Of good and evil much they argu'd then,
Of happineſs and final miſery,
Paſſion and Apathie, and glory and ſhame,
Vain wiſdom all, and falſe Philoſophie:
Yet with a pleaſing ſorcerie could charm
Pain for a while or anguiſh, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm th' obdured breſt
With ſtubborn patience as with triple ſteel.
Another part in Squadrons and groſs Bands,
On bold adventure to diſcover wide
That diſmal world, if any Clime perhaps
Might yield them eaſier habitation, bend
Four ways thir flying March, along the Banks
Of four infernal Rivers that diſgorge
Into the burning Lake thir baleful ſtreams;
Abhorred *Styx* the flood of deadly hate,
Sad *Acheron* of ſorrow, black and deep;
*Cocytus,* nam'd of lamentation loud
Heard on the ruful ſtream; fierce *Phlegeton*
Whoſe waves of torrent fire inflame with rage▪
Farr off from theſe a ſlow and ſilent ſtream,
*Lethe* the River of Oblivion roules
Her watrie Labyrinth, whereof who drinks,
Forthwith his former ſtate and being forgets,
Forgets both joy and grief, pleaſure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen Continent
Lies dark and wilde, beat with perpetual ſtorms
Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin ſeems
Of ancient pile; all elſe deep ſnow and ice,
A gulf profound as that *Serbonian* Bog
Betwixt *Damiata* and mount *Caſius* old,
Where Armies whole have ſunk: the parching Air
Burns frore, and cold performs th' effect of Fire.
Thither by harpy-footed Furies hail'd,
At certain revolutions all the damn'd
Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extreams, extreams by change more fierce,
From Beds of raging Fire to ſtarve in Ice
Thir ſoft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixt, and frozen round,
Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this *Lethean* Sound
Both to and fro, thir ſorrow to augment,
And wiſh and ſtruggle, as they paſs, to reach
The tempting ſtream, with one ſmall drop to looſe
In ſweet forgetfulneſs all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and ſo neer the brink;
But Fate withſtands, and to oppoſe th' attempt
*Meduſa* with *Gorgonian* terror guards
The Ford, and of it ſelf the water flies
All taſte of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of *Tantalus.* Thus roving on
In confus'd march forlorn, th' adventrous Bands
With ſhuddring horror pale, and eyes agaſt
View'd firſt thir lamentable lot, and found
No reſt: through many a dark and drearie Vaile
They paſs'd▪ and many a Region dolorous,
Ore many a Frozen, many a fierie Alpe,
Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and ſhades of deaths,
A Univerſe of death, which God by curſe
Created evil, for evil only good,
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverſe, all monſtrous, all prodigious things,
Abominable, inutterable, and worſe
Than Fables yet have feign'd, or fear conceiv'd,
*Gorgons* and *Hydra's,* and *Chimera's* dire.

Mean while the Adverſary of God and Man,
*Satan* with thoughts inflam'd of higheſt deſign,
Puts on ſwift wings, and towards the Gates of Hell
Explores his ſolitary flight; ſom times
He ſcours the right hand coaſt, ſom times the left,
Now ſhaves with level wing the Deep, then ſoares
Up to the fiery Concave touring high.
As when farr off at Sea a Fleet deſcri'd
Hangs in the Clouds, by *Aequinoctial* Winds
Cloſe ſailing from *Bengala,* or the Iles
Of *Ternate* and *Tidore,* whence Merchants bring
Thir ſpicie Drugs: they on the Trading Flood
Through the wide *Ethiopian* to the Cape
Ply ſtemming nightly toward the Pole. So ſeem'd
Farr off the flying Fiend: at laſt appeer
Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof,
And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Braſs,
Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock,
Impenetrable, impal'd with circling fire,
Yet unconſum'd. Before the Gates there ſat
On either ſide a formidable ſhape;
The one ſeem'd Woman to the waſte, and fair,
But ended foul in many a ſcaly fould
Voluminous and vaſt, a Serpent arm'd
With mortal ſting: about her middle round
A cry of Hell Hounds never ceaſing bark'd
With wide *Cerberian* mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous Peal: yet, when they liſt, would creep,
If aught diſturb'd thir noyſe, into her woomb,
And kennel there, yet there ſtill bark'd and howl'd,
Within unſeen. Farr leſs abhorrd than theſe
Vex'd *Scylla* bathing in the Sea that parts
*Calabria* from the hoarce *Trinacrian* ſhore:
Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when call'd
In ſecret, riding through the Air ſhe comes
Lur'd with the ſmell of infant blood, to dance
With *Lapland* Witches, while the labouring Moon
Eclipſes at thir charms. The other ſhape,
If ſhape it might be call'd that ſhape had none
Diſtinguiſhable in member, joynt, or limb,
Or ſubſtance might be call'd that ſhadow ſeem'd,
For each ſeem'd either; black it ſtood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And ſhook a dreadful Dart; what ſeem'd his head
The likeneſs of a Kingly Crown had on.
*Satan* was now at hand, and from his ſeat
The Monſter moving onward came as faſt
With horrid ſtrides, Hell trembled as he ſtrode.
Th' undaunted Fiend what this might be admir'd,
Admir'd, not fear'd; God and his Son except,
Created thing naught valu'd he nor ſhun'd;
And with disdainful look thus firſt began.

Whence and what art thou, execrable ſhape▪
That dar'ſt, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miſcreated Front athwart my way
To yonder Gates? through them I mean to paſs,
That be aſſur'd, without leave askt of thee:
Retire, or taſte thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heav'n.

To whom the Goblin full of wrauth reply'd,
Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou hee,
Who firſt broke peace in Heav'n and Faith, till then
Unbrok'n, and in proud rebellious Arms
Drew after him the third part of Heav'ns Sons
Conjur'd againſt the higheſt, for which both Thou
And they outcaſt from God, are here condemn'd
To waſte Eternal dayes in woe and pain?
And reck'n'ſt thou thy ſelf with Spirits of Heav'n,
Hell-doom'd, and breath'ſt defiance here and ſcorn
Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more,
Thy King and Lord? Back to thy puniſhment,
Falſe fugitive, and to thy ſpeed add wings,
Leaſt with a whip of Scorpions I purſue
Thy lingring, or with one ſtroke of this Dart
Strange horror ſeiſe thee, and pangs unfelt before.

So ſpake the grieſlie terrour, and in ſhape,
So ſpeaking and ſo threatning, grew tenfold
More dreadful and deform: on th' other ſide
Incenſt with indignation *Satan* ſtood
Unterrifi'd, and like a Comet burn'd,
That fires the length of *Ophiucus* huge
In th' Artick Sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes Peſtilence and Warr. Each at the Head
Level d his deadly aime; thir fatall hands
No ſecond ſtroke intend, and ſuch a frown
Each caſt at th' other, as when two black Clouds
With Heav'ns Artillery fraught, come rattling on
Over the *Caſpian,* then ſtand front to front
Hov'ring a ſpace, till Winds the ſignal blow
To joyn thir dark Encounter in mid air:
So frownd the mighty Combatants, that Hell
Grew darker at thir frown, ſo matcht they ſtood;
For never but once more was either like
To meet ſo great a foe: and now great deeds
Had been achiev'd, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the Snakie Sorcereſs that ſat
Faſt by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key,
Ris'n, and with hideous outcry ruſh'd between▪

O Father, what intends thy hand, ſhe cry'd,
Againſt thy only Son? What fury O Son,
Poſſeſſes thee to bend that mortal Dart
Againſt thy Fathers head? and know'ſt for whom;
For him who ſits above and laughs the while
At thee ordain'd his drudge, to execute
What e're his wrath, which he calls Juſtice, bids,
His wrath which one day will deſtroy ye both.

She ſpake, and at her words the helliſh Peſt
Forbore, then theſe to her *Satan* return'd:

So ſtrange thy outcry, and thy words ſo ſtrange
Thou interpoſeſt, that my ſudden hand
Prevented ſpares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends; till firſt I know of thee,
What thing thou art, thus double-form'd, and why
In this infernal Vaile firſt met thou call'ſt
Me Father, and that Fantaſm call'ſt my Son?
I know thee not, nor ever ſaw till now
Sight more deteſtable then him and thee.

T' whom thus the Portreſs of Hell Gate reply'd;
Hall thou forgot me then, and do I ſeem
Now in thine eye ſo foul, once deemd ſo fair
In Heav'n, when at th' Aſſembly, and in ſight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combin'd
In bold conſpiracy againſt Heav'ns King,
All on a ſudden miſerable pain
Surpris'd thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzie ſwumm
In darkneſs, while thy head flames thick and faſt
Threw forth, till on the left ſide op'ning wide,
Likeſt to thee in ſhape and count'nance bright,
Then ſhining heav'nly fair, a Goddeſs arm'd
Out of thy head I ſprung: amazement ſeis'd
All th' Hoſt of Heav'n; back they recoild affraid
At firſt, and call'd me *Sin,* and for a Sign
Portentous held me; but familiar grown,
I pleas'd, and with attractive graces won
The moſt averſe, thee chiefly, who full oft
Thy ſelf in me thy perfect image viewing
Becam'ſt enamour'd, and ſuch joy thou took'ſt
With me in ſecret, that my womb conceiv'd
A growing burden. Mean while VVarr aroſe,
And fields were fought in Heav'n; wherein remaind
(For what could elſe) to our Almighty Toe
Cleer Victory, to our part loſs and rout
Through all the Empyrean: down they fell
Driv'n headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep, and in the general fall
I alſo; at which time this powerful Key
Into my hand was giv'n, with charge to keep
Theſe Gates for ever ſhut, which none can paſs
Without my op'ning. Penſive here I ſat
Alone, but long I ſat not, till my womb
Pregnant by thee, and now exceſſive grown
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At laſt this odious offspring whom thou ſeeſt
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way
Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain
Diſtorted, all my nether ſhape thus grew
Transform'd: but he my inbred enemie
Forth iſſu'd, brandiſhing his fatal Dart
Made to deſtroy: I fled, and cry'd out *Death;*
Hell trembl'd at the hideous Name, and ſigh'd
From all her Caves, and back reſounded *Death▪*
I fled, but he purſu'd (though more, it ſeems,
Inflam'd with luſt then rage) and ſwifter far,
Mee overtook his mother all diſmaid,
And in embraces forcible and foule
Ingendring with me, of that rape begot
Theſe yelling Monſters that with ceaſleſs cry
Surround me, as thou ſawſt, hourly conceiv'd
And hourly born, with ſorrow infinite
To me, for when they liſt into the womb
That bred them they return, and howle and gnaw
My Bowels, thir repaſt; then burſting forth
A freſh with conſcious terrours vex me round,
That reſt or intermiſſion none I find.
Before mine eyes in oppoſition ſits
Grim *Death* my Son and foe, who ſets them on,
And me his Parent would full ſoon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involvd; and knows that I
Should prove a bitter Morſel, and his bane,
VVhen ever that ſhall be; ſo Fate pronounc'd.
But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, ſhun
His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in thoſe bright Arms,
Though temper'd heav'nly, for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can reſiſt.

She finiſh'd, and the ſuttle Fiend his lore
Soon learnd, now milder, and thus anſwerd ſmooth.
Dear Daughter, ſince thou claim'ſt me for thy Sire,
And my fair Son here ſhowſt me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heav'n, and joys
Then ſweet, now ſad to mention, through dire change
Befalln us unforeſeen, unthought of, know
I come no enemie, but to ſet free
From out this dark and diſmal houſe of pain,
Both him and thee, and all the heav'nly Hoſt
Of Spirits that in our juſt pretenſes arm'd
Fell with us from on high: from them I go
This uncouth errand ſole, and one for all
My ſelf expoſe, with lonely ſteps to tread
Th' unfounded deep, and through the void immenſe
To ſearch with wandring queſt a place foretold
Should be, and, by concurring ſigns, ere now
Created vaſt and round, a place of bliſs
In the Pourlieues of Heav'n, and therein plac't
A race of upſtart Creatures, to ſupply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more remov'd,
Leaſt Heav'n ſurcharg'd with potent multitude
Might hap to move new broiles: Be this or aught
Then this more ſecret now deſign'd, I haſte
To know, and this once known, ſhall ſoon return,
And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death
Shall dwell at eaſe, and up and down unſeen
VVing ſilently the buxom Air, imbalm'd
VVith odours; there ye ſhall be fed and fill'd
Immeaſurably, all things ſhall be your prey.
He ceas'd, for both ſeemd highly pleaſd, and Death
Grinnd horrible a gaſt'y ſmile, to hear
His famine ſhould be fill'd, and bleſt his mawe
Deſtin'd to that good hour: no leſs rejoyc'd
His mother bad, and thus beſpake her Sire.

The key of this infernal Pit by due.
And by command of Heav'ns all-powerful King
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
Theſe Adamantine Gates; againſt all force
Death ready ſtands to interpoſe his dart,
Fearleſs to be o'rmatcht by living might.
But what ow I to his commands above
Who hates me, and hath hither thruſt me down
Into this gloom of *Tartarus* profound,
To ſit in hateful Office here confin'd,
Inhabitant of Heav'n, and heav'n lie-born,
Here in perpetual agonie and pain,
With terrors and with clamors compaſst round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed:
Thou art my Father, thou ray Author, thou
My being gav'ſt me, whom ſhould I obey
But thee, whom follow? thou wilt bring me ſoon
To that new world of light and bliſs, among
The Gods who live at eaſe, where I ſhall Reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beſeems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end.

Thus ſaying, from her ſide the fatal Key,
Sad inſtrument of all our woe, ſhe took;
And towards the Gate rouling her beſtial train,
Forthwith the huge Porcullis high up drew,
Which but her ſelf not all the *Stygian* powers
Could once have mov'd; then in the key-hole turns
Th' intricate wards, and every Bolt and Bar
Of maſſie Iron or ſollid Rock with eaſe
Unfaſt'ns: on a ſudden op'n flie
With impetuous recoile and jarring ſound
Th' infernal dores, and on thir hinges grate
Harſh Thunder, that the loweſt bottom ſhook
Of *Erebus.* She op'nd, but to ſhut
Excel'd her power; the Gates wide op'n ſtood,
That with extended wings a Bannerd Hoſt
Under ſpread Enſigns marching might paſs through
With Horſe and Chariots rankt in looſe array;
So wide they ſtood, and like a Furnace mouth
Caſt forth redounding ſmoak and ruddy flame.
Before thir eyes in ſudden view appear
The ſecrets of the hoarie deep, a dark
Illimitable Ocean without bound,
Without dimenſion, where length, breadth, & highth,
And time and place are loſt; where eldeſt Night
And *Chaos,* Anceſtors of Nature, hold
Eternal *Anarchie,* amidſt the noiſe
Of endleſs Warrs, and by confuſion ſtand.
For hot, cold, moiſt, and dry, four Champions fierce
Strive here for Maiſtrie, and to Battel bring
Thir embryon Atoms; they around the flag
Of each his Faction, in thir ſeveral Clanns,
Light-arm'd or heavy, ſharp, ſmooth, ſwift or ſlow,
Swarm populous, unnumber'd as the Sands
Of *Barca* or *Cyrene's* torrid ſoil,
Levied to ſide with warring Winds, and poiſe
Thir lighter wings. To whom theſe moſt adhere,
Hee rules a moment; *Chaos* Umpire ſits,
And by deciſion more imbroiles the fray
By which he Reigns: next him high Arbiter
*Chance* governs all. Into this wilde Abyſs,
The Womb of nature and perhaps her Grave,
Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire,
But all theſe in thir pregnant cauſes mixt
Confus'dly, and which thus muſt ever fight,
Unleſs th' Almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more Worlds,
Into this wild Abyſs the warie fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and look'd a while,
Pondering his Voyage; for no narrow frith
He had to croſs. Nor was his eare leſs peal'd
With noiſes loud and ruinous (to compare
Great things with ſmall) then when *Bellona* ſtorms,
With all her battering Engines bent to raſe
Som Capital City; or leſs then if this frame
Of Heav'n were falling, and theſe Elements
In mutinie had from her Axle torn
The ſtedfaſt Earth. At laſt his Sail-broad Vannes
He ſpreads for flight, and in the ſurging ſmoak
Uplifted ſpurns the ground, thence many a League
As in a cloudy Chair aſcending rides
Audacious, but that ſeat ſoon failing, meets
A vaſt vacuitie: all unawares
Fluttring his pennons vain plumb down he drops
Ten thouſand fadom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not by ill chance
The ſtrong rebuff of ſom tumultuous cloud
Inſtinct with Fire and Nitre hurried him
As many miles aloft: that furie ſtay'd,
Quencht in a Boggie *Syrtis,* neither Sea,
Nor good dry Land: nigh founderd on he fares,
Treading the crude conſiſtence, half on foot,
Half flying; behoves him now both Oare and Saile.
As when a Gryfon through the Wilderneſs
With winged courſe ore Hill or moarie Dale,
Purſues the *Arimaſpian,* who by ſtelth
Had from his wakeful cuſtody purloind
The guarded Gold: So eagerly the fiend
Ore bog or ſteep, through ſtrait, rough, denſe, or rare,
With head, hands wings or feet purſues his way,
And ſwims or ſinks, or wades, or creeps, or flyes:
At length a univerſal hubbub wilde
Of ſtunning ſounds and voices all confus'd
Born through the hollow dark aſſaults his eare
With loudeſt vehemence: thither he plyes,
Undaunted to meet there what ever power
Or Spirit of the nethermoſt Abyſs
Might in that noiſe reſide, of whom to ask
Which way the neareſt coaſt of darkneſs lyes
Bordering on light; when ſtrait behold the Throne
Of *Chaos,* and his dark Pavilion ſpread
Wide on the waſteful Deep; with him Enthron'd
Sat Sable-veſted *Night,* eldeſt of things,
The Conſort of his Reign; and by them ſtood
*Orcus* and *Ades,* and the dreaded name
Of *Demogorgon; Rumor* next and *Chance,*
And *Tumult* and *Confuſion* all imbroild,
And *Diſcord* with a thouſand various mouths.

T' whom *Satan* turning boldly, thus. Ye Powers
And Spirits of this nethermoſt Abyſs,
*Chaos* and *ancient Night,* I come no Spy,
With purpoſe to explore or to diſturb
The ſecrets of your Realm, but by conſtraint
Wandring this darkſome Deſart, as my way,
Lies through your ſpacious Empire up to light,
Alone, and without guide, half loſt, I ſeek
What readieſt path leads where your gloomie bounds
Confine with Heav'n; or if ſom other place
From your Dominion won, th' Ethereal King
Poſſeſſes lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound, direct my courſe;
Directed no mean recompence it brings
To your behoof, if I that Region loſt,
All uſurpation thence expell'd, reduce
To her original darkneſs and your ſway
(Which is my preſent journey) and once more
Erect the Standard there of *ancient Night;*
Yours be th' advantage all, mine the revenge.

Thus *Satan;* and him thus the Anarch old
With faultring ſpeech and viſage incompos'd
Anſwer'd. I know thee, ſtranger, who thou art,
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head againſt Heav'ns King, though overthrown.
I ſaw and heard, for ſuch a numerous Hoſt
Fled not in ſilence through the frighted deep
VVith ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confuſion worſe confounded; and Heav'n Gates
Pourd out by millions her victorious Bands
Purſuing. I upon my Frontieres here
Keep reſidence; if all I can will ſerve,
That little which is left ſo to defend,
Encroacht on ſtill through our inteſtine broiles
VVeakning the Scepter of old *Night:* firſt Hell
Your dungeon ſtretching far and wide beneath;
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another VVorld
Hung ore my Realm, link'd in a golden Chain
To that ſide Heav'n from whence your Legions fell:
If that way be your walk, you have not farr;
So much the neerer danger; go and ſpeed;
Havock and ſpoil and ruin are my gain.

He ceas'd; and *Satan* ſtaid not to reply,
But glad that now his Sea ſhould find a ſhore,
VVith freſh alacritie and force renew'd
Springs upward like a Pyramid of fire
Into the wilde expanſe, and through the ſhock
Of fighting Elements, on all ſides round
Environ'd wins his way; harder beſet
And more endanger'd, then when *Argo* paſs'd
Through *Boſporus* betwixt the juſtling Rocks:
Or when *Ʋlyſſes* on the Larbord ſhunnd
*Charybdis,* and by th' other whirlpool ſteard.
So he with difficulty and labour hard
Mov'd on, with difficulty and labour hee;
But hee once paſt, ſoon after when man fell,
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain
Following his track, ſuch was the will of Heav'n,
Pav'd alter him a broad and beat'n way
Over the dark Abyſs, whoſe boiling Gulf
Tamely endur'd a Bridge of wondrous length
From Hell continu'd reaching th' utmoſt Orbe
Of this frail VVorld; by which the Spirits perverſe
VVith eaſie intercourſe paſs to and fro
To tempt or puniſh mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by ſpecial grace.
But now at laſt the ſacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heav'n
Shoots farr into the boſom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn; here Nature firſt begins
Her fardeſt verge, and *Chaos* to retire
As from her outmoſt works a brok'd foe
VVith tumult leſs and with leſs hoſtile din,
That *Satan* with leſs toil, and now with eaſe
VVafts on the calmer wave by dubious light
And like a weather-beaten Veſſel holds
Gladly the Port, though Shrouds and Tackle torn;
Or in the emptier waſte, reſembling Air,
VVeighs his ſpread wings, at leaſure to behold
Farr off th' Empyreal Heav'n, extended wide
In circuit, undetermind ſquare or round,
VVith Opal Towrs and Battlements adorn'd
Of living Saphire, once his native Seat;
And faſt by hanging in a golden Chain
This pendant world, in bigneſs as a Starr
Of ſmalleſt Magnitude cloſe by the Moon▪
Thither full fraught with miſchievous revenge,
Accurſt, and in a curſed hour he hies.
