---
position: 3
label: "Book III"
depth: 1
---
## BOOK III.

## THE ARGUMENT.

God ſitting on his Throne ſees *Satan* flying towards this world, then newly created; ſhews him to the Son who ſat at his right hand; foretells the ſucceſs of *Satan* in perverting mankind; clears his own Juſtice and Wiſdom from all imputation, having created Man free and able enough to have withſtood his Tempter; yet declares his purpoſe of grace towards him, in regard he fell not of his own malice, as did *Satan,* but by him ſeduc't. The Son of God renders praiſes to his Father for the manifeſtation of his gracious purpoſe towards Man; but God again declares, that Grace cannot be extended towards Man without the ſatisfaction of divine Juſtice; Man hath offended the majeſty of God by aſpiring to God-head, and therefore with all his Progeny devoted to death must dye, unleſs ſome one can be found ſufficient to anſwer for his offence, and undergo his Puniſhment. The Son of God freely offers himſelf a Ranſome for Man: the Father accepts hint, ordains his incarnation, pronounces his exaltation above all Names in Heaven and Earth; commands all the Angels to adore him; they obey, and hymning to thir Harps in full Quire, celebrate the Father and the Son. Mean while *Satan* alights upon the bare Convex of this Worlds outermost Orb; where wandring he first finds a place ſince call'd The Lymbo of Vanity; what perſons and things fly up thither; thence comes to the Gate of Heaven, deſcrib'd aſcending by ſtaires, and the waters above the Firmament that flow about it: His paſſage thence to the Orb of the Sun; he finds there *Uriel* the Regient of that Orb, but first changes himſelf into the ſhape of a meaner Angel; and pretending a zealous deſire to behold the new Creation and Man whom God had plac't here, inquires of him the place of his habitation, and is directed; alights first on Mount *Niphates.*

HAil holy Light, of spring of Heav'n firſt-born,
Or of th' Eternal Coeternal beam
May I expreſs thee unblam'd? ſince God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from Eternitie, dwelt then in thee,
Bright effluence of bright eſſence increate.
Or hear'ſt thou rather pure Ethereal ſtream,
Whoſe Fountain who ſhall tell? before the Sun,
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice
Of God, as with a Mantle didſt inveſt
The riſing world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formleſs infinite.
Thee I re-viſit now with bolder wing,
Eſcap't the *Stygian* Pool, though long detain'd
In that obſcure ſo journ, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkneſs borne
With other notes then to th' *Orphean* Lyre
I ſung of *Chaos* and *Eternal Night,*
Taught by the heav'nly Muſe to venture down
The dark deſcent, and up to reaſcend,
Though hard and rare: thee I reviſit ſafe,
And feel thy ſovran vital Lamp; but thou
Reviſit'ſt not theſe eyes, that rowle in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop ſerene hath quencht thir Orbs,
Or dim ſuffuſion veild. Yet not the more
Ceaſe I to wander where the Muſes haunt
Cleer Spring, or ſhadie Grove, or Sunnie Hill,
Smit with the love of ſacred Song; but chief
Thee *Sion* and the flowrie Brooks beneath
That waſh thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I viſit: nor ſomtimes forget
Thoſe other two equal'd with me in Fate,
So were I equal'd with them in renown,
Blind *Thamyris* and blind *Maeonides,*
And *Tireſias* and *Phineus* Prophets old.
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntarie move
Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful Bird
Sings darkling, and in ſhadieſt Covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal Note. Thus with the Year
Seaſons return, but not to me returns
Day, or the ſweet approach of Ev'n or Morn,
Or ſight of vernal bloom, or Summers Roſe,
Or flocks, or heards, or human face divine;
But cloud in ſtead, and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the chearful wayes of men
Cut off, and for the Book of knowledg fair
Preſented with a Univerſal blanc
Of Natures works to mee expung'd and ras'd,
And wiſdome at one entrance quite ſhut out.
So much the rather thou Celeſtial light
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate, there plane eyes, all miſt from thence
Purge and diſperſe, that I may ſee and tell
Of things inviſible to mortal ſight.

Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure Empyrean where he ſits
High Thron'd above all highth, bent down his eye,
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as Starrs, and from his ſight receiv'd
Beatitude paſt utterance; on his right
The radiant image of his Glory ſat,
His onely Son; On Earth he firſt beheld
Our two firſt Parents, yet the onely two
Of mankind, in the happie Garden plac't,
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivald love
In bliſsful ſolitude; he then ſurvey'd
Hell and the Gulf between, and *Satan* there
Coaſting the wall of Heav'n on this ſide Night
In the dun Air ſublime, and ready now
To ſtoop with wearied wings, and willing feet
On the bare outſide of this World, that ſeem'd
Firm land imboſom'd without Firmament,
Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air.
Him God beholding from his proſpect high,
Wherein paſt, preſent, future he beholds,
Thus to his onely Son foreſeeing ſpake.

Onely begotten Son, ſeeſt thou what rage
Tranſports our adverſarie, whom no bounds
Preſcrib'd, no barrs of Hell, nor all the chains
Heapt on him there, nor yet the main Abyſs
Wide interrupt can hold; ſo bent he ſeems
On deſparate reveng, that ſhall redound
Upon his own rebellious head. And now
Through all reſtraint broke looſe he wings his way
Not farr off Heav'n, in the Precincts of light,
Directly towards the new created World,
And Man there plac't, with purpoſe to aſſay
If him by force he can deſtroy, or worſe,
By ſome falſe guile pervert; and ſhall pervert
For man will hark'n to his glozing lyes,
And eaſily tranſgreſs the ſole Command,
Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall,
Hee and his faithleſs Progenie: whoſe fault?
Whoſe but his own? ingrate, he had of mee
All he could have; I made him juſt and right,
Sufficient to have ſtood, though free to fall.
Such I created all th' Ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who ſtood and them who faild;
Freely they ſtood who ſtood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have givn ſincere
Of true allegiance, conſtant Faith or Love,
Where onely what they needs muſt do, appeard,
Not what they would? what praiſe could they receive?
What pleaſure I from ſuch obedience paid,
When Will and Reaſon (Reaſon alſo is choice)
Uſeleſs and vain, of freedom both deſpoild,
Made paſſive both, had ſervd neceſſitie,
Not mee. They therefore as to right belongd,
So were created, nor can juſtly accuſe
Thir maker, or thir making, or thir Fate,
As if predeſtination over-rul'd
Thir will, diſpos'd by abſolute Decree
Or high foreknowledge; they themſelves decreed
Thir own revolt, not I: if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no leſs prov'd certain unforeknown.
So without leaſt impulſe or ſhadow of Fate,
Or aught by me immutablie foreſeen,
They treſpaſs, Authors to themſelves in all
Both what they judge and what they chooſe; for ſo
I formd them free, and free they muſt remain,
Till they enthrall themſelves: I elſe muſt change
Thir nature, and revoke the high Decree
Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordain'd
Thir freedom, they themſelves ordain'd thir fall▪
The firſt ſort by thir own ſuggeſtion fell,
Self-tempted, ſelf-deprav'd: Man falls deceiv'd
By the other firſt: Man therefore ſhall find grace,
The other none: in Mercy and Juſtice both,
Through Heav'n and Earth, ſo ſhall my glorie excel,
But Mercy firſt and laſt ſhall brighteſt ſhine.

Thus while God ſpake, ambroſial fragrance fill'd
All Heav'n, and in the bleſſed Spirits elect
Senſe of new joy ineffable diffus'd:
Beyond compare the Son of God was ſeen
Moſt glorious, in him all his Father ſhon
Subſtantially expreſs'd, and in his face
Divine compaſſion viſibly appeerd,
Love without end, and without meaſure Grace,
Which uttering thus he to his Father ſpake.

O Father, gracious was that word which clos'd
Thy ſovran ſentence, that Man ſhould find grace;
For which both Heav'n and Earth ſhall high extoll
Thy praiſes, with th' innumerable ſound
Of Hymns and ſacred Songs, wherewith thy Throne
Encompaſs'd ſhall reſound thee ever bleſt.
For ſhould Man finally be loſt, ſhould Man
Thy creature late ſo lov'd, thy youngeſt Son
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joynd
With his own folly? that be from thee farr,
That farr be from thee, Father, who art Judg
Of all things made, and judgeſt onely right.
Or ſhall the Adverſarie thus obtain
His end, and fruſtrate thine, ſhall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodneſs bring to naught,
Or proud return though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accompliſh't and to Hell
Draw after him the whole Race of mankind,
By him corrupted? or wilt thou thy ſelf
Aboliſh thy Creation, and unmake,
For him, what for thy glorie thou haſt made?
So ſhould thy goodneſs and thy greatneſs both
Be queſtiond and blaſpheam'd without defence.

To whom the great Creatour thus reply'd.
O Son, in whom my Soul hath chief delight,
Son of my boſom, Son who art alone
My word, my wiſdom, and effectual might,
All haft thou ſpok'n as my thoughts are, all
As my Eternal purpoſe hath decreed:
Man ſhall not quite be loſt, but ſav'd who will,
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely voutſaft; once more I will renew
His lapſed powers, though forfeit and enthrall'd
By ſin to foul exorbitant deſires;
Upheld by me, yet once more he ſhall ſtand
On even ground againſt his mortal foe,
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
His fall'n condition is, and to me ow
All his deliv'rance, and to none but me.
Some I have choſen of peculiar grace
Elect above the reſt; ſo is my will:
The reſt ſhall hear me call, and oft be warnd
Thir ſinful date, and to appeaſe betimes
Th' incenſed Deitie, while offerd grace
Invites; for I will cleer thir ſenſes dark,
What may ſuffice, and ſoft'n ſtonie hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To Prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endevord with ſincere intent,
Mine ear ſhall not be ſlow, mine eye not ſhut.
And I will place within them as a guide
My Umpire *Conſcience,* whom if they will hear,
Light after light well us'd they ſhall attain,
And to the end perſiſting, ſafe arrive.
This my long ſufferance and my day of grace
They who neglect and ſcorn, ſhall never taſte;
But hard be hard'nd, blind be blinded more,
That they may ſtumble on, and deeper fall;
And none but ſuch from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not don; Man diſobeying,
Diſloyal breaks his fealtie, and ſinns
Againſt the high Supremacie of Heav'n,
Affecting God-head, and ſo looſing all,
To expiate his Treaſon hath naught left,
But to deſtruction ſacred and devote,
He with his whole poſteritie muſt dye,
Dye hee or Juſtice muſt; unleſs for him
Som other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid ſatisfaction, death for death.
Say Heav'nly powers, where ſhall we find ſuch love,
Which of ye will be mortal to redeem
Mans mortal crime, and juſt th' unjuſt to ſave,
Dwels in all Heaven charitie ſo deare?

He ask'd, but all the Heav'nly Quire ſtood mute,
And ſilence was in Heav'n: on mans behalf
Patron or Interceſſor none appeerd,
Much leſs that durſt upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ranſom ſet.
And now without redemption all mankind
Muſt have bin loſt, adjudg'd to Death and Hell
By doom ſevere, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fulneſs dwels of love divine,
His deareſt mediation thus renewd.

Father, thy word is paſt, man ſhall find grace;
And ſhall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The ſpeedieſt of thy winged meſſengers,
To viſit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unſought,
Happie for man, ſo coming; he her aide
Can never ſeek, once dead in ſins and loſt;
Attonement for himſelf or offering meet,
Indebted and undon, hath none to bring:
Behold mee then, mee for him, life for life
I offer, on mee let thine anger fall;
Account mee man; I for his ſake will leave
Thy boſom, and this glorie next to thee
Freely put off, and for him laſtly dye
Well pleas'd, on me let Death wreck all his rage;
Under his gloomie power I ſhall not long
Lie vanquiſht; thou haſt givn me to poſſeſs
Life in my ſelf for ever, by thee I live,
Though now to Death I yield, and am his due
All that of me can die, yet that debt paid,
Thou wilt not leave me in the loathſom grave
His prey, nor ſuffer my unſpotted Soule
For ever with corruption there to dwell;
But I ſhall riſe Victorious, and ſubdue
My vanquisher, ſpoild of his vanted ſpoile;
Death his deaths wound ſhall then receive, and ſtoop
Inglorious, of his mortall ſting diſarm'd.
I through the ample Air in Triumph high
Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and ſhow
The powers of darkneſs bound. Thou at the ſight
Pleas'd, out of Heaven ſhalt look down and ſmile,
While by thee rais'd I ruin all my Foes,
Death laſt, and with his Carcaſs glut the Grave:
Then with the multitude of my redeemd
Shall enter Heaven long abſent, and returne,
Father, to ſee thy face, wherein no cloud
Of anger ſhall remain, but peace aſſur'd,
And reconcilement; wrauth ſhall be no more
Thenceforth, but in thy preſence Joy entire.

His words here ended, but his meek aſpect
Silent yet ſpake, and breath'd immortal love
To mortal men, above which only ſhon
Filial obedience: as a ſacrifice
Glad to be offer'd, he attends the will
Of his great Father. Admiration ſeis'd
All Heav'n, what this might mean, and whither tend
Wondring; but ſoon th' Almighty thus reply'd:

O thou in Heav'n and Earth the only peace
Found out for mankind under wrauth, O thou
My ſole complacence! well thou know'ſt how dear,
To me are all my works, nor Man the leaſt
Though laſt created, that for him I ſpare
Thee from my boſom and right hand, to ſave,
By looſing thee a while, the whole Race loſt.
Thou therefore whom thou only canſt redeem,
Thir Nature alſo to thy Nature joyn;
And be thy ſelf Man among men on Earth,
Made fleſh, when time ſhall be, of Virgin ſeed.
By wondrous birth: Be thou in *Adams* room
The Head of all mankind, though *Adams* Son.
As in him periſh all men, ſo in thee
As from a ſecond root ſhall be reſtor'd,
As many as are reſtor'd, without thee none.
His crime makes guiltie all his Sons, thy merit
Imputed ſhall abſolve them who renounce
Thir own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee tranſplanted, and from thee
Receive new life. So Man, as is moſt juſt,
Shall ſatisfie for Man, be judg'd and die,
And dying riſe, and riſing with him raiſe
His Brethren, ranſomd with his own dear life.
So Heav'nly love ſhall outdoo Helliſh hate
Giving to death, and dying to redeeme,
So dearly to redeem what Helliſh hate
So eaſily deſtroy'd, and ſtill deſtroyes
In thoſe who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor ſhalt thou by deſcending to aſſume
Mans Nature, leſs'n or degrade thine owne.
Becauſe thou haſt, though Thron'd in higheſt bliſs
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
God-like fruition, quitted all to ſave
A World from utter loſs, and haſt been found
By Merit more then Birthright Son of God,
Found worthieſt to be ſo by being Good,
Farr more then Great or High; becauſe in thee
Love hath abounded more then Glory abounds,
Therefore thy Humiliation ſhall exalt
With thee thy Manhood alſo to this Throne▪
Here ſhalt thou ſit incarnate, here ſhalt Reign
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed univerſal King, all Power
I give thee, reign for ever, and aſſume
Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supream
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce:
All knees to thee ſhall bow, of them that bide
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell;
When thou attended gloriouſly from Heav'n
Shalt in the Sky appeer, and from thee ſend
The ſummoning Arch-Angels to proclaime
Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Windes
The living, and forthwith the cited dead
Of all paſt Ages to the general Doom
Shall haſt'n, ſuch a peal ſhall rouſe thir ſleep.
Then all thy Saints aſſembl'd, thou ſhalt judge
Bad men and Angels, they arraignd ſhall ſink
Beneath thy Sentence; Hell her numbers full,
Thenceforth ſhall be for ever ſhut. Mean while
The World ſhall burn, and from her aſhes ſpring
New Heav'n and Earth, wherein the juſt ſhall dwell,
And after all thir tribulations long
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth.
Then thou thy regal Scepter ſhalt lay by,
For regal Scepter then no more ſhall need,
God ſhall be All in All. But all ye Gods,
Adore him, who to compaſs all this dies,
Adore the Son, and honour him as mee.

No ſooner had th' Almighty ceas't, but all
The multitude of Angels with a ſhout
Loud as from numbers without number, ſweet
As from bleſt voices, uttering joy, Heav'n rung
With Jubilee, and loud Hoſanna's filld
Th' eternal Regions: lowly reverent
Towards either Throne they bow, and to the ground
With ſolemn adoration down they caſt
Thir Crowns inwove with Amarant and Gold,
Immortal Amarant, a Flour which once
In Paradiſe, faſt by the Tree of Life
Began to bloom, but ſoon for mans offence
To Heav'n remov'd where firſt it grew, there grows,
And flours aloft ſhading the Fount of Life,
And where the river of Bliſs through midſt of Heavn
Rowls o're *Eliſian* Flours her Amber ſtream;
With theſe that never fade the Spirits elect
Bind thir reſplendent locks inwreath'd with beams,
Now in looſe Garlands thick thrown off, the bright
Pavement that like a Sea of Jaſper ſhon
Impurpl'd with Celeſtial Roſes ſmil'd.
Then Crown'd again thir gold'n Harps they took,
Harps ever tun'd, that glittering by thir ſide
Like Quivers hung, and with Praeamble ſweet
Of charming ſymphonie they introduce
Thir ſacred Song, and waken raptures high;
No voice exempt, no voice but well could joine
Melodious part, ſuch concord is in Heav'n.

Thee Father firſt they ſung Omnipotent,
Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,
Eternal King; thee Author of all being,
Fountain of Light, thy ſelf inviſible
Amidſt the glorious brightneſs where thou ſit'ſt
Thron'd inacceſſible, but when thou ſhad'ſt
The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud
Drawn round about thee like a radiant Shrine,
Dark with exceſſive bright thy skirts appeer,
Yet dazle Heav'n, that brighteſt Seraphim
Approach not, but with both wings veil thir eyes,
Thee next they ſang of all Creation firſt,
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
In whoſe conſpicuous count'nance, without cloud
Made viſible, th' Almighty Father ſhines,
Whom elſe no Creature can behold; on thee
Impreſst the effulgence of his Glorie abides,
Transfus'd on thee his ample Spirit reſts.
Hee Heav'n of Heavens and all the Powers therein
By thee created, and by thee threw down
Th' aſpiring Dominations: thou that day
Thy Fathers dreadful Thunder didſt not ſpare,
Nor ſtop thy flaming Chariot wheels, that ſhook
Heav'ns everlaſting Frame, while o're the necks
Thou drov'ſt of warring Angels diſarraid.
Back from purſuit thy Powers with loud acclaime
Thee only extoll'd, Son of thy Fathers might,
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes,
Not ſo on Man; him. through their malice fall'n,
Father of Mercie and Grace, thou didſt not doome
So ſtrictly, but much more to pitie encline:
No ſooner did thy dear and onely Son
Perceive thee purpos'd not to doom frail Man
So ſtrictly, but much more to pitie enclin'd,
He to appeaſe thy wrauth, and end the ſtrife
Of Mercy and Juſtice in thy face diſcern'd,
Regardleſs of the Bliſs wherein hee ſat
Second to thee, offerd himſelf to die
For mans offence. O unexampl'd love,
Love no where to be found leſs then Divine!
Hail Son of God, Saviour of Men, thy Name
Shall be the copious matter of my Song
Henceforth, and never ſhall my Harp thy praiſe
Forget, nor from thy Fathers praiſe disjoine.

Thus they in Heav'n, above the ſtarry Sphear,
Thir happie hours in joy and hymning ſpent.
Mean while upon the firm opacous Globe
Of this round World, whoſe firſt convex divides
The luminous inferior Orbs, enclos'd
From *Chaos* and th' inroad of Darkneſs old,
*Satan* alighted walks: a Globe farr off
It ſeem'd, now ſeems a boundleſs Continent
Dark, waſte, and wild, under the frown of Night
Starleſs expos'd, and ever-threatning ſtorms
Of *Chaos* bluſtring round, inclement skie;
Save on that ſide which from the wall of Heav'n
Though diſtant farr ſom ſmall reflection gaines
Of glimmering air leſs vext with tempeſt loud:
Here walk'd the Fiend at large in ſpacious field.
As when a Vultur on *Imaus* bred,
Whoſe ſnowie ridge the roving *Tartar* bounds,
Diſlodging from a Region ſcarce of prey
To gorge the fleſh of Lambs or yeanling Kids
O Hills where Flocks are fed, flies toward the Springs
Of *Ganges* or *Hydaſpes, Indian* ſtreams;
But in his way lights on the barren Plaines
Of *Sericana,* where *Chineſes* drive
With Sails and Wind thir canie Waggons light:
So on this windie Sea of Land, the Fiend
Walk'd up and down alone bent on his prey,
Alone, for other Creature in this place
Living or liveleſs to be found was none,
None yet, but ſtore hereafter from the earth
Up hither like Aereal vapours flew
Of all things tranſitorie and vain, when Sin
With vanity had filld the works of men:
Both all things vain, and all who in vain things
Built thir fond hopes of Glorie or laſting fame,
Or happineſs in this or th' other life;
All who have thir reward on Earth, the fruits
Of painful Superſtition and blind Zeal,
Naught ſeeking but the praiſe of men, here find
Fit retribution, emptie as thir deeds;
All th' unaccompiſht works of Natures hand,
Abortive, monſtrous, or unkindly mixt,
Diſſolvd on Earth, fleet hither, and in vain,
Till final diſſolution, wander here,
Not in the neighbouring Moon, as ſome have dreamd;
Thoſe argent Fields more likely habitants,
Tranſlated Saints, or middle Spirits hold
Betwixt th' Angelical and Human kinde:
Hither of ill-joynd Sons and Daughters born
Firſt from the ancient World thoſe Giants came
With many a vain exploit, though then renownd:
The builders next of *Babel* on the Plain
Of *Sennaar,* and ſtill with vain deſigne
New *Babels,* had they wherewithall, would build:
Others came ſingle; he who to be deemd
A God, leap'd fondly into *Aetna* flames,
*Empedocles,* and hee who to enjoy
*Plito*'s *Elyſium,* leap'd into the Sea,
*Cleombrotus,* and many more too long,
Embryo's and Idiots, Eremits and Friers
White, Black and Grey, with all thir trumperie.
Here Pilgrims roam, that ſtray'd ſo farr to ſeek
In *Golgotha* him dead, who lives in Heav'n;
And they who to be ſure of Paradiſe
Dying put on the weeds of *Dominic,*
Or in *Franciſcan* think to paſs diſguis'd;
They paſs the Planets ſeven, and paſs the fixt,
And that Cryſtalline Sphear whoſe ballance weighs
The Trepidation talkt, and that firſt mov'd;
And now Saint *Peter* at Heav'ns Wicket ſeems
To wait them with his Keys, and now at foot
Of Heav'ns aſcent they lift thir Feet, when loe
A violent croſs wind from either Coaſt
Blows them tranſverſe ten thouſand Leagues awry
Into the devious Air; then might ye ſee
Cowles, Hoods and Habits with thir wearers toſt
And flutterd Raggs, then Reliques, Beads,
Indulgences, Diſpenſes, Pardons, Bulls,
The ſport of Winds: all theſe upwhirld aloft
Fly o're the backſide of the World farr off
Into a *Limbo* large and broad, ſince calld
The Paradiſe of Fools, to few unknown
Long after, now unpeopl'd, and uncrod;
All this dark Globe the Fiend found as he paſs'd,
And long he wanderd, till at laſt a gleame
Of dawning light turnd thither-ward in haſte
His travell'd ſteps; farr diſtant he deſcries
Aſcending by degrees magnificent
Up to the wall of Heaven a Structure high,
At top whereof, but farr more rich appeerd
The work as of a Kingly Palace Gate
With Frontiſpice of Diamond and Gold
Imbelliſht, thick with ſparkling orient Gemmes
The Portal ſhon, inimitable on Earth
By Model, or by ſhading Pencil drawn▪
The Stairs were ſuch as whereon *Jacob* ſaw
Angels aſcending and deſcending, bands
Of Guardians bright, when he from *Eſau* fled
To *Padan-Aram* in the field of *Luz,*
Dreaming by night under the open Skie,
And waking cri'd, *This is the Gate of Heav'n*
Each Stair myſteriouſly was meant, nor ſtood
There alwayes, but drawn up to Heav'n ſomtimes
Viewleſs, and underneath a bright Sea flow'd
Of Jaſper, or of liquid Pearle, whereon
Who after came from Earth, ſayling arriv'd,
Wafted by Angels, or flew o're the Lake
Rapt in a Chariot drawn by fiery Steeds.
The Stairs were then let down, whether to dare
The Fiend by eaſie aſcent, or aggravate
His ſad excluſion from the dores of
Direct againſt which op'nd from beneath,
Juſt o're the bliſsful ſeat of Paradiſe,
A paſſage down to th' Earth, a paſſage wide,
Wider by farr then that of after-times
Over Mount *Sion,* and, though that were large,
Over the *Promis'd Land* to God ſo dear,
By which, to viſit oft thoſe happy Tribes,
On high beheſts his Angels to and fro
Paſs'd frequent, and his eye with choice regard
From *Paneas* the fount of *Jordans* flood
To *Beerſaba,* where the *Holy Land*
Borders on *Aegypt* and the *Arabian* ſhoare;
So wide the op'ning ſeemd, where bounds were ſet
To darkneſs, ſuch as bound the Ocean wave.
*Satan* from hence now on the lower ſtair
That ſcal'd by ſteps of Gold to Heav'n Gate
Looks down with wonder at the ſudden view
Of all this World at once. As when a Scout
Through dark and deſart wayes with peril gone
All night; at laſt by break of chearful dawne
Obtains the brow of ſome high-climbing Hill,
Which to his eye diſcovers unaware
The goodly proſpect of ſome forein land
Firſt-ſeen, or ſome renown'd Metropolis
With gliſtering Spires and Pinnacles adornd,
Which now the Riſing Sun guilds with his beams,
Such wonder ſeis'd, though after Heaven ſeen,
The Spirit maligne, but much more envy ſeis'd
At ſight of all this World beheld ſo faire.
Round he ſurveys, and well might, where he ſtood
So high above the circling Canopie
Of Nights extended ſhade; from Eaſtern Point
Of *Libra* to the fleecie Starr that bears
*Andromeda* farr off *Atlantic* Seas
Beyond th' *Horizon;* then from Pole to Pole
He views in bredth, and without longer pauſe
Down right into the Worlds firſt Region throws
His flight precipitant, and windes with eaſe
Through the pure marble Air his oblique way
Amongſt innumerable Starrs, that ſhon
Stars diſtant, but nigh hand ſeemd other Worlds,
Or other Worlds they ſeemd, or happy Iles,
Like thoſe *Heſperian* Gardens fam'd of old,
Fortunate Fields, and Groves and flourie Vales,
Thrice happy Iles, but who dwelt happy there
He ſtayd not to enquire: above them all
The golden Sun in ſplendor likeſt Heaven
Allur'd his eye: Thither his courſe he bends
Through the calm Firmament; but up or downe
By center, or eccentric, hard to tell,
Or Longitude, where the great Luminarie
A looff the vulgar Conſtellations thick,
That from his Lordly eye keep diſtance due,
Diſpenſes Light from farr; they as they move
Thir Starry dance in numbers that compute
Days, months, & years, towards his all-chearing Lamp
Turn ſwift thir various motions, or are turnd
By his Magnetic beam, that gently warms
The Univers, and to each inward part
With gentle penetration, though unſeen,
Shoots inviſible venue even to the deep:
So wondrouſly was ſet his Station bright.
There lands the Fiend, a ſpot like which perhaps
Aſtronomer in the Sun's lucent Orbe
Through his glaz'd Optic Tube yet never ſaw.
The place he found beyond expreſſion bright,
Compar'd with aught on Earth, Medal or Stone;
Not all parts like, but all alike informd
With radiant light, as glowing Iron with fire;
If mettal, part ſeemd Gold, part Silver cleer;
If ſtone, Carbuncle moſt or Chryſolite,
Rubie or Topaz, to the Twelve that ſhon
In *Aarons* Breſt-plate, and a ſtone beſides
Imagind rather oft then elſewhere ſeen,
That ſtone, or like to that which here below
Philoſophers in vain ſo long have ſought,
In vain, though by thir powerful Art they binde
Volatil *Hermes,* and call up unbound
In various ſhape old *Proteus* from the Sea,
Draind through a Limbec to his Native forme.
What wonder then if fields and regions here
Breathe forth *Elixir* pure, and Rivers run
Potable Gold, when with one vertuous touch
Th' Arch-chimic Sun ſo farr from us remote
Produces with Terreſtrial Humor mixt
Here in the dark ſo many precious things
Of colour glorious and effect ſo rare?
Here matter new to gaze the Devil met
Undazl'd, farr and wide his eye commands,
For ſight no obſtacle found here, nor ſhade,
But all Sun-ſhine, as when his Beams at Noon
Culminate from th' *Aequator,* as they now
Shot upward ſtill direct, whence no way round
Shadow from body opaque can fall, and the Aire,
No where ſo cleer, ſharp'nd his viſual ray
To objects diſtant farr, whereby he ſoon
Saw within kenn a glorious Angel ſtand,
The ſame whom *John* ſaw alſo in the Sun:
His back was turnd, but not his brightneſs hid;
Of beaming ſunnie Raies, a golden tiar
Circl'd his Head, nor leſs his Locks behind
Illuſtrious on his Shoulders fledge with wings
Lay waving round; on ſom great charge imploy'd
He ſeemd, of fixt in cogitation deep.
Glad was the Spirit impure as now in hope
To find who might direct his wandring flight
To Paradiſe the happie ſeat of Man,
His journies end and our beginning woe.
But firſt he caſts to change his proper ſhape,
Which elſe might work him danger or delay:
And now a ſtripling Cherube he appeers,
Not of the prime, yet ſuch as in his face
Youth ſmil'd Celeſtial, and to every Limb
Sutable grace diffus'd, ſo well he feignd,
Under a Coronet his flowing haire
In curles on either cheek plaid, wings he wore
Of many a colourd plume ſprinkl'd with Gold,
His habit fit for ſpeed ſuccinct, and held
Before his decent ſteps a Silver wand.
He drew not nigh unheard, the Angel bright,
Ere he drew nigh, his radiant viſage turnd,
Admoniſht by his ear, and ſtrait was known
Th' Arch-Angel *Ʋriel,* one of the ſeav'n
Who in Gods preſence, neereſt to his Throne
Stand ready at command, and are his Eyes
That run through all the Heav'ns, or down to th' Earth
Bear his ſwift errands over moiſt and dry,
O're Sea and Land: him *Satan* thus accoſtes;

*Ʋriel,* for thou of thoſe ſeav'n Spirits that ſtand
In ſight of God's high Throne, gloriouſly bright,
The firſt art wont his great authentic will
Interpreter through higheſt Heav'n to bring,
Where all his Sons thy Embaſſie attend;
And here art likelieſt by ſupream decree
Like honour to obtain, and as his Eye
To viſit oft this new Creation round;
Unſpeakable deſire to ſee, and know
All theſe his wondrous works, but chiefly Man,
His chief delight and favour, him for whom
All theſe his works ſo wondrous he ordaind,
Hath brought me from the Quires of Cherubim
Alone thus wandring. Brighteſt Seraph tell
In which of all theſe ſhining Orbes hath Man
His fixed ſeat, or fixed ſeat hath none,
But all theſe ſhining Orbes his choice to dwell;
That I may find him, and with ſecret gaze,
Or open admiration him behold
On whom the great Creator hath beſtowd
Worlds, and on whom hath all theſe graces powrd▪
That both in him and all things, as is meet,
The Univerſal Maker we may praiſe;
Who juſtly hath drivn out his Rebell Foes
To deepeſt Hell, and to repair that loſs
Created this new happie Race of Men
To ſerve him better: wiſe are all his wayes.

So ſpake the falſe diſſembler unperceivd;
For neither Man nor Angel can diſcern
Hypocriſie, the onely evil that walks
Inviſible, except to God alone,
By his permiſſive will, through Heav'n and Earth:
And oft though wiſdom wake, ſuſpicion ſleeps
At wiſdoms Gate, and to ſimplicitie
Reſigns her charge, while goodneſs thinks no ill
Where no ill ſeems: Which now for once beguil'd
*Ʋriel* though Regent of the Sun, and held
The ſharpeſt ſighted Spirit of all in Heav'n;
Who to the fraudulent Impoſtor foule
In his uprightneſs anſwer thus returnd.
Fair Angel, thy deſire which tends to know
The works of God, thereby to gforifie
The great Work-Maiſter, leads to no exceſs
That reaches blame, but rather merits praiſe
The more it ſeems exceſs, that led thee hither
From thy Empyreal Manſion thus alone,
To witneſs with thine eyes what ſome perhaps
Contented with report hear onely in heav'n:
For wonderful indeed are all his works,
Pleaſant to know, and worthieſt to be all
Had in remembrance alwayes with delight;
But what created mind can comprehend
Thir number, or the wiſdom infinite
That brought them forth, but hid thir cauſes deep.
I ſaw when at his Word the formleſs Maſs,
This worlds material mould, came to a heap:
*Confuſion* heard his voice, and wilde uproar
Stood rul'd, ſtood vaſt infinitude confin'd;
Till at his ſecond bidding darkneſs fled,
Light ſhon, and order from diſorder ſprung:
Swift to thir ſeveral Quarters haſted then
The cumbrous Elements, Earth, Flood, Aire, Fire,
And this Ethereal quinteſſence of Heav'n
Hew upward, ſpirited with various forms,
That rowld orbicular, and turnd to Starrs
Numberleſs, as thou ſeeſt, and how they move;
Each had his place appointed, each his courſe,
The reſt in circuit walles this Univerſe.
Look downward on that Globe whoſe hither ſide
With light from hence, though but reflected, ſhines;
That place is Earth the ſeat of Man, that light
His day, which elſe as th' other Hemiſphere
Night would invade, but there the neighbouring Moon
(So call that oppoſite fair Starr) her aide
Timely interpoſes, and her monthly round
Still ending, ſtill renewing, through mid Heav'n;
With borrowd light her countenance triform
Hence fills and empties to enlighten th' Earth,
And in her pale dominion checks the night.
That ſpot to which I point is *Paradiſe,*
*Adams* abode, thoſe loftie ſhades his Bowre.
Thy way thou canſt not miſs, me mine requires.

Thus ſaid, he turnd, and *Satan* bowing low,
As to ſuperior Spirits is wont in Heaven,
Where honour due and reverence none neglects,
Took leave, and toward the coaſt of Earth beneath,
Down from th' Ecliptic, ſped with hop'd ſucceſs,
Throws his ſteep flight in many an Aerie wheele,
Nor ſtaid, till on *Niphates* top he lights.
