---
position: 5
label: "Book V"
depth: 0
---
## BOOK V.

## THE ARGUMENT.

Morning approach't, *Eve* relates to *Adam* her troubleſome dream; he likes it not, yet comforts her: They come forth to thir day labours: Thir Morning Hymn at the Door of thir Bower. God to render Man inexcuſable ſends *Raphael* to admoniſh him of his obedience, of his free eſtate, of his enemy near at hand; who he is, and why his enemy, and whatever elſe may avail *Adam* to know. *Raphael* comes down to Paradiſe, his appearance deſcrib'd, his coming diſcern'd by *Adam* afar off ſitting at the door of his Bower; he goes out to meet him, brings him to his lodge, entertains him with the choyceſt fruits of Paradiſe got together by *Eve;* thir diſcourſe at Table: *Raphael* performs his meſſage, minds *Adam* of his ſtate and of his enemy; relates at *Adams* requeſt who that enemy is, and how he came to be ſo, beginning from his firſt revolt in Heaven, and the occaſion thereof; how he drew his Legions after him to the parts of the North, and there incited them to rebel with him, perſwading all but only *Abdiel* a Seraph, who in Argument diſwades and oppoſes him, then forſakes him.

NOw Morn her roſie ſteps in th' Eaſtern Clime
Advancing, ſow'd the earth with Orient Pearle,
When *Adam* wak't, ſo cuſtomd, for his ſleep
Was Aerie light from pure digeſtion bred,
And temperat vapors bland, which th' only ſound
Of leaves and fuming rills, *Aurora*'s fan,
Lightly diſpers'd, and the ſhrill Matin Song
Of Birds on every bough; ſo much the more
His wonder was to find unwak'nd *Eve*
With Treſſes diſcompos'd, and glowing Cheek,
As through unquiet reſt: he on his ſide
Leaning half-rais'd, with looks of cordial Love
Hung over her enamour'd, and beheld
Beautie, which whether waking or aſleep,
Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voice
Milde, as when *Zephyrus* on *Flora* breathes,
Her hand ſoft touching, whiſperd thus. Awake
My faireſt, my eſpous'd, my lateſt found,
Heav'ns laſt beſt gift, my ever new delight,
Awake, the morning ſhines, and the freſh field
Calls us, we loſe the prime, to mark how ſpring
Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove,
What drops the Myrrhe, and what the balmie Reed,
How Nature paints her colours, how the Bee
Sits on the Bloom extracting liquid ſweet.

Such whiſpering wak'd her, but with ſtartl'd eye
On *Adam,* whom imbracing, thus ſhe ſpake.

O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repoſe,
My Glorie, my Perfection, glad I ſee
Thy face, and Morn return'd, for I this Night,
Such night till this I never paſs'd, have dream'd,
If dream'd, not as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day paſs't, or morrows next deſigne,
But of offence and trouble, which ray mind
Knew never till this irkſom night; methought
Cloſe at mine ear one call'd me forth to walk
With gentle voice, I thought it thine; it ſaid,
Why ſleepſt thou *Eve?* now is the pleaſant time,
The cool, the ſilent, ſave where ſilence yields
To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake
Tunes ſweeteſt his love-labor'd ſong; now reignes
Full Orb'd the Moon, and with more pleaſing light
Shadowie ſets off the face of things; in vain,
If none regard; Heav'n wakes with all his eyes,
Whom to behold but thee, Natures deſire,
In whoſe ſight all things joy, with raviſhment
Attracted by thy beauty ſtill to gaze.
I roſe as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I paſs'd through ways
That brought me on a ſudden to the Tree
Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it ſeem'd,
Much fairer to my Fancie then by day:
And as I wondring lookt▪ beſide it ſtood
One ſhap •d and wing'd like one of thoſe from Heav'n
By us oft ſeen; his dewie locks diſtill'd
*Ambroſia;* on that Tree he alſo gaz'd;
And O fair Plant, ſaid he, with fruit ſurcharg'd,
Deigns none to eaſe thy load and taſte thy ſweet,
Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge ſo deſpis'd?
Or envie, or what reſerve forbids to taſte?
Forbid who will, none ſhall from me withhold
Longer thy offerd good, why elſe ſet here?
This ſaid he paus'd not, but with ventrous Arme
He pluckt, he taſted; mee damp horror chil'd
At ſuch bold words voucht with a deed ſo bold:
But he thus overjoy'd, O Fruit Divine,
Sweet of thy ſelf, but much more ſweet thus cropt,
Forbidd'n here, it ſeems, as onely fit
For God's, yet able to make Gods of Men:
And why not Gods of Men, ſince good, the more
Communicated, more abundant growes,
The Author not impair'd, but honourd more?
Here, happie Creature, fair Angelic *Eve,*
Partake thou alſo; happie though thou art,
Happier thou mayſt be, worthier canſt not be:
Taſte this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thy ſelf a Goddeſs, not to Earth confind,
But ſomtimes in the Air, as wee, ſomtimes
Aſcend to Heav'n, by merit thine, and ſee
What life the Gods live there, and ſuch live thou.
So ſaying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that ſame fruit held part
Which he had pluckt; the pleaſant ſavourie ſmell
So quick'nd appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taſte. Forthwith up to the Clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The Earth outſtretcht immenſe, a proſpect wide
And various: wondring at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; ſuddenly.
My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, ſunk down,
And fell aſleep; but O how glad I wak'd
To find this but a dream! Thus *Eve* her Night
Related, and thus *Adam* anſwerd ſad.

Beſt Image of my ſelf and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in ſleep
Affects me equally; nor ran I like
This uncouth dream, of evil ſprung I fear;
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure. But know that in the Soule
Are many leſſer Faculties that ſerve
Reaſon as chief; among theſe Fanſie next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senſes repreſent,
She forms Imaginations, Aerie ſhapes,
Which Reaſon joyning or disjoyning, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell when Nature reſts.
Oft in her abſence mimic Fanſie wakes
To imitare her; but misjoyning ſhapes,
Wilde work produces oft, and moſt in dreams,
Ill matching words and deeds long paſt or late.
Som ſuch reſemblances methinks I find
Of our laſt Eevnings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition ſtrange: yet be not ſad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, ſo unapprov'd, and leave
No ſpot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
That what in ſleep thou didſt abhorr to dream,
Waking thou never wilt conſent to do.
Be not diſheart'nd then, nor cloud thoſe looks
That wont to be more chearful and ſerene
Then when fair Morning firſt ſmiles on the World,
And let us to our freſh imployments riſe
Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours
That open now thir choiceſt boſom'd ſmells
Reſervd from night, and kept for thee in ſtore.

So cheard he his fair Spouſe, and ſhe was cheard,
But ſilently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wip'd them with her haire;
Two other precious drops that ready ſtood,
Each in thir Chryſtal ſluce, hee ere they fell
Kiſs'd as the gracious ſigns of ſweet remorſe
And pious awe, that feard to have offended.

So all was cleard, and to the Field they haſte.
But firſt from under ſhadie arborous roof,
Soon as they forth were come to open ſight
Of day-ſpring, and the Sun, who ſcarce up riſen
With wheels yet hov'ring o're the Ocean brim,
Shot paralel to the earth his dewie ray,
Diſcovering in wide Lantskip all the Eaſt
Of Paradiſe and *Edens* happie Plains,
Lowly they bow'd adoring, and began
Thir Oriſons, each Morning duly paid
In various ſtyle, for neither various ſtyle
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praiſe
Thir Maker, in fit ſtrains pronounc't or ſung
Unmeditated, ſuch prompt eloquence
Flowd from thir lips, in Proſe or numerous Verſe,
More tuneable then needed Lute or Harp,
To add more ſweetneſs, and they thus began.

Theſe are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almightie, thine this univerſal Frame,
Thus wondrous fair; thy ſelf how wondrous then!
Unſpeakable, who firſt above theſe Heavens
To us inviſible or dimly ſeen
In theſe thy loweſt works, yet theſe declare
Thy goodneſs beyond thought, and Power Divine:
Speak yee who beſt can tell, ye Sons of light,
Angels, for yee behold him, and with ſongs
And choral ſymphonies, Day without Night,
Circle his Throne rejoycing, yee in Heav'n,
On Earth joyn all ye Creatures to extoll
Him firſt, him laſt, him midſt, and without end.
Faireſt of Starrs, laſt in the train of Night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crownſt the ſmiling Morn
With thy bright Circlet, praiſe him in thy Spheare
While day ariſes, that ſweet hour of Prime.
Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soule.
Acknowledge him thy Greater, ſound his praiſe
In thy eternal courſe, both when thou climb•ſt,
And when high Noon haſt gaind, and when thou fallſt.
Moon, that now meetſt the orient Sun, now fli'ſt
With the fixt Starrs, fixt in thir Orb that flies,
And yee five other wandring Fires that move
In myſtic Dance not without Song, reſound
His praiſe, who out of Darkneſs call'd up Light.
Aire, and ye Elements the eldeſt birth
Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion run
Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix
And nouriſh all things, let your ceaſleſs change
Varie to our great Maker ſtill new praiſe.
Ye Miſts and Exhalations that now riſe
From Hill or ſteaming Lake, duskie or grey,
Till the Sun paint your fleecie skirts with Gold,
In honour to the Worlds great Author riſe,
Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd skie,
Or wet the thirſtie Earth with falling ſhowers,
Riſing or falling ſtill advance his praiſe.
His praiſe ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow,
Breathe ſoft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every Plant, in ſign of Worſhip wave.
Fountains and yee, that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praiſe.
Joyn voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds,
That ſinging up to Heaven Gate aſcend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praiſe;
Yee that in Waters glide, and yee that walk
The Earth, and ſtately tread, or lowly creep;
Witneſs if I be ſilent, Morn or Eeven,
To Hell, or Valley, Fountain, or freſh ſhade
Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praiſe.
Hail univerſal Lord, be bounteous ſtill
To give us onely good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil or conceald,
Diſperſe it, as now light diſpels the dark.

So pray'd they innocent, and to thir thoughts
Firm peace recoverd ſoon and wonted calm.
On to thir mornings rural work they haſte
Among ſweet dewes and flours; where any row
Of Fruit-trees overwoodie reachd too farr
Thir pamperd boughes, and needed hands to check
Fruitleſs imbraces: or they led the Vine
To wed her Elm; ſhe ſpous'd about him twines
Her mariageable arms, and with her brings
Her dowr th' adopted Cluſters, to adorn
His barren leaves. Them thus imploid beheld
With pittie Heav'ns high King, and to him call'd
*Raphael,* the ſociable Spirit, that deign'd
To travel with *Tobias,* and ſecur'd
His marriage with the ſeaventimes-wedded Maid.

*Raphael,* ſaid hee, thou hear'ſt what ſtir on Earth
*Satan* from Hell ſcap't through the darkſom Gulf
Hath raiſd in Paradiſe, and how diſturbd
This night the human pair, how he deſignes
In them at once to ruin all mankind.
Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend
Converſe with *Adam,* in what Bowre or ſhade
Thou find'ſt him from the heat of Noon retir'd,
To reſpit his day-labour with repaſt,
Or with repoſe; and ſuch diſcourſe bring on,
As may adviſe him of his happie ſtate,
Happineſs in his power left free to will,
Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,
Yet mutable; whence warne him to beware
He ſwerve not too ſecure: tell him withall
His danger, and from whom, what enemie
Late falln himſelf from Heav'n, is plotting now
The fall of others from like ſtate or bliſs;
By violence, no, for that ſhall be withſtood,
But by deceit and lies; this let him know,
Leaſt wilfully tranſgreſſing he pretend
Surpriſal, unadmoniſht, unforewarnd.

So ſpake th' Eternal Father, and fulfilld
All Juſtice: nor delaid the winged Saint
After his charge receivd; but from among
Thouſand Celeſtial Ardors, where he ſtood
Vaild with his gorgeous wings, up ſpringing light
Flew through the midſt of Heav'n; th' angelic Quires
On each hand parting, to his ſpeed gave way
Through all th' Empyreal road; till at the Gate
Of Heav'n arriv'd, the gate ſelf-opend wide
On golden Hinges turning, as by work
Divine the ſov'ran Architect had fram'd.
From hence, no cloud, or, to obſtruct his ſight,
Starr interpos'd, however ſmall he ſees,
Not unconform to other ſhining Globes,
Earth and the Gard'n of God, with Cedars crownd
Above all Hills. As when by night the Glaſs
Of *Galileo,* leſs aſſur'd, obſerves
Imagind Lands and Regions in the Moon:
Or Pilot from amidſt the *Cyclades*
*Delos* or *Samos* firſt appeering kenns
A cloudy ſpot. Down thither prone in flight
He ſpeeds, and through the vaſt Ethereal Skie
Sailes between worlds and worlds, with ſteddie wing
Now on the polar windes, then with quick Fann
Winnows the buxom Air; till within ſoare
Of Towring Eagles, to all the Fowles he ſeems
A *Phaenix,* gaz'd by all, as that ſole Bird
When to enſhrine his reliques in the Sun's
Bright Temple, to *Aegyptian Theb's* he flies.
At once on th' Eaſtern cliff of Paradiſe
He lights, and to his proper ſhape returns
A Seraph wingd; ſix wings he wore, to ſhade
His lineaments Divine; the pair that clad
Each ſhoulder broad, came mantling o're his breſt
With regal Ornament; the middle pair;
Girt like a Starrie Zone his waſte, and round
Skirted his loines and thighes with downie Gold
And colours dipt in Heav'n; the third his feet
Shaddowd from either heele with featherd maile
Skie-tinctur'd grain. Like *Maia's* ſon he ſtood,
And ſhook his Plumes, that Heav'nly fragrance filld
The circuit wide. Strait knew him all the Bands
Of Angels under watch; and to his ſtate,
And to his meſſage high in honour riſe;
For on ſom meſſage high they gueſsd him bound.
Thir glittering Tents he paſsd, and now is come
Into the bliſsful field, through Groves of Myrrhe,
And flouring Odours, Caſſia, Nard, and Balme;
A Wilderneſs of ſweets; for Nature here
Wantond as in her prime, and plaid at will
Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more ſweet,
Wilde above Rule or Art; enormous bliſs.
Him through the ſpicie Forreſt onward com
*Adam* diſcernd, as in the dore he ſat
Of his coole Bowre, while now the mounted Sun
Shot down direct his ſervid Raies to warme
Earths inmoſt womb, more warmth then *Adam* needs;
And *Eve* within, due at her hour prepar'd
For dinner ſavourie fruits, of taſte to pleaſe
True appetite, and not diſreliſh thirſt
Of nectarous draughts between, from milkie ſtream,
Berrie or Grape: to whom thus *Adam* call'd.

Haſte hither *Eve,* and worth thy ſight behold
Eaſtward among thoſe Trees, what glorious ſhape
Comes this way moving; ſeems another Morn
Ris'n on mid-noon; ſom great beheſt from Heav'n
To us perhaps he brings, and will voutſafe
This day to be our Gueſt. But goe with ſpeed,
And what thy ſtores contain, bring forth and poure
Abundance, fit to honour and receive
Our Heav'nly ſtranger; well we may afford
Our givers thir own gifts, and large beſtow
From large beſtowd, where Nature multiplies
Her fertil growth, and by disburd'ning grows
More fruitful, which inſtructs us not to ſpare.

To whom thus *Eve. Adam,* earths hallowd mould,
Of God inſpir'd, ſmall ſtore will ſerve, where ſtore,
All ſeaſons, ripe for uſe hangs on the ſtalk;
Save what by frugal ſtoring firmneſs gains
To nouriſh, and ſuperfluous moiſt conſumes:
But I will haſte and from each bough and break,
Each Plant and jucieſt Gourd will pluck ſuch choice
To entertain our Angel gueſt, as hee
Beholding ſhall confeſs that here on Earth
God hath diſpenſt his bounties as in Heav'n.

So ſaying, with diſpatchful looks in haſte
She turns, on hoſpitable thoughts intent
What choice to chuſe for delicacie beſt,
What order, ſo contriv'd as not to mix
Taſtes, not well joynd, inelegant, but bring
Taſte after taſte upheld with kindlieſt change,
Beſtirs her then, and from each tender ſtalk
Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yields
In *India* Eaſt or Weſt, or middle ſhoare
In *Pontus* or the *Punic* Coaſt, or where
*Alcinous* reign'd, fruit of all kindes, in coate,
Rough, or ſmooth rin'd, or bearded husk, or ſhell
She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unſparing hand; for drink the Grape
She cruſhes, inoffenſive mouſt, and meathes
From many a berrie, and from ſweet kernels preft
She tempers dulcet creams, nor theſe to hold
Wants her fit veſſels pure, then ſtrews the ground
With Roſe and Odours from the ſhrub unfum'd.
Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meet
His god-like Gueſt, walks forth, without more train
Accompani'd then with his own compleat
Perfections, in himſelf was all his ſtate,
More ſolemn then the tedious pomp that waits
On Princes, when thir rich Retinue long
Of Horſes led, and Grooms beſmeard with Gold
Dazles the croud, and ſets them all agape.
Neerer his preſence *Adam* though not awd,
Yet with ſubmiſs approach and reverence meek,
As to a ſuperior Nature, bowing low,

Thus ſaid. Native of Heav'n, for other place
None can then Heav'n ſuch glorious ſhape contain;
Since by deſcending from the Thrones above,
Thoſe happie places thou haſt deignd a while
To want, and honour theſe, voutſafe with us
Two onely, who yet by ſov'ran gift poſſeſs
This ſpacious ground, in yonder ſhadie Bowre
To reſt, and what the Garden choiceſt bears
To ſit and taſte, till this meridian heat
Be over, and the Sun more coole decline.

Whom thus the Angelic Vertue anſwerd milde.
*Adam,* I therefore came, nor art thou ſuch
Created, or ſuch place haſt here to dwell,
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heav'n
To viſit thee; lead on then where thy Bowre
Oreſhades; for theſe mid-hours, till Eevning riſe
I have at will. So to the Silvan Lodge
They came, that like *Pomona*'s Arbour ſmil'd
With flourets deck't and fragrant ſmells; but *Eve*
Undeckt, ſave with her ſelf more lovely fair
Then Wood-Nymph, or the faireſt Goddeſs feign'd
Of three that in Mount *Ida* naked ſtrove,
Stood to entertain her gueſt from Heav'n; no vaile
Shee needed, Venue-proof, no thought infirme
Alterd her cheek. On whom the Angel *Haile*
Beſtowd, the holy ſalutation us'd
Long after to bleſt *Marie,* ſecond *Eve.*

Haile Mother of Mankind, whoſe fruitful Womb
Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons
Then with theſe various fruits the Trees of God
Have heap'd this Table. Rais'd of graſſie terf
Thir Table was, and moſſile ſeats had round,
And on her ample Square from ſide to ſide
All *Autumn* pil'd, though *Spring* and *Autumn* here
Danc'd hand in hand. A while diſcourſe they hold;
No fear leſt Dinner coole; when thus began
Our Authour. Heav'nly ſtranger, pleaſe to taſte
Theſe bounties which our Nouriſher, from whom
All perfet good unmeaſur'd out, deſcends,
To us for food and for delight hath caus'd
The Earth to yield; unſavourie food perhaps
To ſpiritual Natures; only this I know,
That one Celeſtial Father gives to all.

To whom the Angel. Therefore what he gives
(Whoſe praiſe be ever ſung) to man in part
Spiritual, may of pureſt Spirits be found
No ingrateful food: and food alike thoſe pure
Intelligential ſubſtances require
As doth your Rational; and both contain
Within them every lower facultie
Of ſenſe, whereby they hear, ſee, ſmell, touch, taſte,
Taſting concoct, digeſt, aſſimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be ſuſtaind and fed; of Elements
The groſſer feeds the purer, Earth the Sea,
Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air thoſe Fires
Ethereal, and as loweſt firſt the Moon;
Whence in her viſage round thoſe ſpots, unpurg'd
Vapours not yet into her ſubſtance turnd.
Nor doth the Moon no nouriſhment exhale
From her moiſt Continent to higher Orbes.
The Sun that light imparts to all, receives
From all his alimental recompence
In humid exhalations, and at Even
Sups with the Ocean: though in Heav'n the Trees
Of life ambroſial frutage bear, and vines
Yield Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn
We bruſh mellifluous Dewes, and find the ground
Cover'd with pearly grain: yet God hath here
Varied his bounty ſo with new delights,
As may compare with Heaven; and to taſte
Think not I ſhall be nice. So down they ſat,
And to thir viands fell, nor ſeemingly
The Angel, nor in miſt, the common gloſs
Of Theologians, but with keen diſpatch
Of real hunger, and concoctive heate
To tranſubſtantiate; what redounds, tranſpires
Through Spirits with eaſe; nor wonder; if by fire
Of ſooty coal the Empiric Alchimiſt
Can turn, or holds it poſſible to turn
Metals of droſſieſt Ore to perfet Gold
As from the Mine. Mean while at Table *Eve*
Miniſterd naked, and thir flowing cups
With pleaſant liquors crown'd: O innocence
Deſerving Paradiſe: if ever, then,
Then had the Sons of God excuſe to have bin
Enamour'd at that ſight, but in thoſe hearts
Love unlibidinous reign'd, nor jealouſie
Was underſtood, the injur'd Lovers Hell.

Thus when with meats and drinks they had ſuffic'd,
Not burd'nd Nature, ſudden mind aroſe
In *Adam,* not to let th' occaſion paſs
Given him by this great Conference to know
Of things above his World, and of thir being
Who dwell in Heav'n, whoſe excellence he ſaw
Tranſcend his own ſo farr, whoſe radiant forms
Divine effulgence, whoſe high Power ſo far
Exceeded human, and his wary ſpeech
Thus to th' Empyreal Miniſter he fram'd.

Inhabitant with God, now know I well
Thy favour, in this honour done to man,
Under whoſe lowly roof thou haſt voutſaf't
To enter, and theſe earthly fruits to taſte,
Food not of Angels, yet accepted ſo,
As that more willingly thou couldſt not ſeem
At Heav'ns high feaſts to have fed: yet what compare?

To whom the winged Hierarch repli'd.
O *Adam,* one Almightie is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return,
If not deprav'd from good, created all
Such to perfection, one firſt matter all,
Indu'd with various forms, various degrees
Of ſubſtance, and in things that live, of life;
But more refin'd, more ſpiritous, and pure,
As neerer to him plac't or neerer tending
Each in thir ſeveral active Sphears aſſignd,
Till body up to ſpirit work, in bounds
Proportiond to each kind. So from the root
Springs lighter the green ſtalk, from thence the leaves
More aerie, laſt the bright conſummate floure
Spirits odorous breathes: flours and thir fruit
Mans nouriſhment, by gradual ſcale ſublim'd
To vital Spirits aſpire, to animal,
To intellectual, give both life and ſenſe,
Fanſie and undemanding, whence the Soule
Reaſon receives, and reaſon is her being,
Diſcurſive, or Intuitive; diſcourſe
Is ofteſt yours, the latter moſt is ours,
Differing but in degree, of kind the ſame.
Wonder not then, what God for you ſaw good
If I refuſe not, but convert, as you,
To proper ſubſtance, time may come when men
With Angels may participate, and find
No inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare:
And from theſe corporal nutriments perhaps
Your bodies may at laſt turn all to Spirit,
Improv'd by tract of time, and wingd aſcend
Ethereal, as wee, or may at choice
Here or in Heav'nly Paradiſes dwell;
If ye be found obedient, and retain
Unalterably firm his love entire
Whoſe progenie you are. Mean while enjoy
Your fill what happineſs this happie ſtate
Can comprehend, incapable of more.

To whom the Patriarch of mankind repli'd,
O favourable ſpirit, propitious gueſt,
Well haſt thou taught the way that might direct
Our knowledge, and the ſcale of Nature ſet
From center to circumference, whereon
In contemplation of created things
By ſteps we may aſcend to God. But ſay,
What meant that caution joind, *if ye be found*
*Obedient?* can we want obedience then
To him, or poſſibly his love deſert
Who formd us from the duſt, and plac'd us here
Full to the utmoſt meaſure of what bliſs
Human deſires can ſeek or apprehend?

To whom the Angel. Son of Heav'n and Earth,
Attend: That thou art happie, owe to God;
That thou continu'ſt ſuch, owe to thy ſelf,
That is, to thy obedience; therein ſtand.
This was that caution giv'n thee; be advis'd.
God made thee perfet, not immutable;
And good he made thee, but to perſevere
He left it in thy power, ordaind thy will
By nature free, not over-rul'd by Fate
Inextricable, or ſtrict neceſſity;
Our voluntarie ſervice he requires,
Not our neceſſitated, ſuch with him
Findes no acceptance, nor can find, for how
Can hearts, not free, be tri'd whether they ſerve
Willing or no, who will but what they muſt
By Deſtinie, and can no other chooſe?
My ſelf and all th' Angelic Hoſt that ſtand
In ſight of God enthron'd, our happie ſtate
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds;
On other ſurety none; freely we ſerve,
Becauſe wee freely love, as in our will
To love or not; in this we ſtand or fall:
And ſom are fall'n, to diſobedience fall'n,
And ſo from Heav'n to deepeſt Hell; O fall
From what high ſtate of bliſs into what woe!

To whom our great Progenitor. Thy words
Attentive, and with more delighted eare,
Divine inſtructer, I have heard, then when
Cherubic Songs by night from neighbouring Hills
Aereal Muſic ſend: nor knew I not
To be both will and deed created free;
Yet that we never ſhall forget to love
Our maker, and obey him whoſe command
Single, is yet ſo juſt, my conſtant thoughts
Aſſur'd me, and ſtill aſſure: though what thou tellſt
Hath paſt in Heav'n, ſom doubt within me move,
But more deſire to hear, if thou conſent,
The full relation, which muſt needs be ſtrange,
Worthy of Sacred ſilence to be heard;
And we have yet large day, for ſcarce the Sun
Hath finiſht half his journey, and ſcarce begins
His other half in the great Zone of Heav'n.

Thus *Adam* made requeſt, and *Raphael*
After ſhort pauſe aſſenting, thus began.

High matter thou injoinſt me, O prime of men,
Sad task and hard, for how ſhall I relate
To human ſenſe th' inviſible exploits
Of warring Spirits; how without remorſe
The ruin of ſo many glorious once
And perfet while they ſtood; how laſt unfould
The ſecrets of another world, perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good
This is diſpenc't, and what ſurmounts the reach
Of human ſenſe, I ſhall delineate ſo,
By lik'ning ſpiritual to corporal forms
As may expreſs them beſt, though what if Earth
Be but the ſhaddow of Heav'n, and things therein
Each to other like, more then on earth is thought?

As yet this world was not, and *Chaos* wilde
Reignd where theſe Heav'ns now rowl, where Earth now reſts
Upon her Center pois'd, when on a day
(For time, though in Eternitie, appli'd
To motion, meaſures all things durable
By preſent, paſt, and future) on ſuch day
As Heav'ns great Year brings forth, th' Empyreal Hoſt
Of Angels by Imperial ſummons call'd,
Innumerable before th' Almighties Throne
Forthwith from all the ends of Heav'n appeerd
Under thir Hierarchs in orders bright
Ten thouſand thouſand Enſignes high advanc'd,
Standards, and Gonfalons twixt Van and Reare
Streame in the Aire, and for diſtinction ſerve
Of Hierarchies, of Orders, and Degrees;
Or in thir glittering Tiſſues bear imblaz'd
Holy Memorials, acts of Zeale and Love
Recorded eminent. Thus when in Orbes
Of circuit inexpreſſible they ſtood,
Orb within Orb, the Father infinite,
By whom in bliſs imboſom'd ſat the Son,
Amidſt as from a flaming Mount, whoſe top
Brightneſs had made inviſible, thus ſpake.

Hear all ye Angels, Progenie of Light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
Hear my Decree, which unrevok't ſhall ſtand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My onely Son, and on this holy Hill
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
At my right hand; your Head I him appoint;
And by my Self have ſworn to him ſhall bow
All knees in Heav'n, and ſhall confeſs him Lord:
Under his great Vice-gerent Reign abide
United as one individual Soule
For ever happie: him who diſobeyes
Mee diſobeyes, breaks union, and that day
Caſt out from God and bleſſed viſion, falls
Into utter darkneſs, deep ingulft, his place
Ordaind without redemption, without end.

So ſpake th' Omnipotent, and with his words
All ſeemd well pleas'd, all ſeem'd, but were not all
That day, as other ſolemn dayes, they ſpent
In ſong and dance about the ſacred Hill,
Myſtical dance, which yonder ſtarrie Spheare
Of Planets and of fixt in all her Wheeles
Reſembles neareſt, mazes intricate,
Eccentric, intervolv'd, yet regular
Then moſt, when moſt irregular they ſeem,
And in thir motions harmonic Divine
So ſmooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear
Liſtens delighted. Eevning now approach'd
(For wee have alſo our Eevning and our Morn,
Wee ours for change delectable, not need)
Forthwith from dance to ſweet repaſt they turn
Deſirous; all in Circles as they ſtood,
Tables are ſet, and on a ſudden pil'd
With Angels Food, and rubied Nectar flows
In Pearl, in Diamond, and maſſie Gold,
Fruit of delicious Vines, the growth of Heav'n.
On flours repos'd, and with freſh flourets crownd.
They eate, they drink, and in communion ſweet
Quaff immortalitie and joy, ſecure
Of ſurfet where full meaſure onely bounds
Exceſs, before th' all bounteous King, who ſhowrd
With copious hand, rejoycing in thir joy.
Now when ambroſial Night with Clouds exhal'd
From that high mount of God, whence light & ſhade
Spring both, the face of brighteſt Heav'n had changd
To grateful Twilight (for Night comes not there
In darker veile) and roſeat Dews diſpos'd
All but the unſleeping eyes of God to reſt,
Wide over all the Plain, and wider farr
Then all this globous Earth in Plain out ſpred,
(Such are the Courts of God) Th' Angelic throng
Diſperſt in Bands and Files thir Camp extend
By living Streams among the Trees of Life,
Pavilions numberleſs, and ſudden reard,
Celeſtial Tabernacles, where they ſlept,
Fannd with coole Winds, ſave thoſe who in thir courſe
Melodious Hymns about the ſovran Throne
Alternate all night long: but not ſo wak'd
*Satan,* ſo call him now, his former name
Is heard no more in Heav'n; he of the firſt,
If not the firſt Arch-Angel, great in Power,
In favour and praeeminence, yet fraught
With envie againſt the Son of God, that day
Honourd by his great Father, and proclaimd
*Meſſiah* King anointed, could not beare
Through pride that ſight, & thought himſelf impaird.
Deep malice thence conceiving and diſdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the duskie houre
Friendlieſt to ſleep and ſilence, he reſolv'd
With all his Legions to diſlodge, and leave
Unworſhipt, unobey'd the Throne ſupream
Contemptuous, and his next ſubordinate
Awak'ning, thus to him in ſecret ſpake.

Sleepſt thou Companion dear, what ſleep can cloſe
Thy eye lids? and remembreſt what Decree
Of yeſterday, ſo late hath paſt the lips
Of Heav'ns Almightie. Thou to me thy thoughts
Waſt wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;
Both waking we were one; how then can now
Thy ſleep diſſent? new Laws thou ſeeſt impos'd;
New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raiſe
In us who ſerve, new Counſels, to debate
What doubtful may enſue, more in this place
To utter is not ſafe. Aſſemble thou
Of all thoſe Myriads which we lead the chief;
Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night
Her ſhadowie Cloud withdraws, I am to haſte,
And all who under me thir Banners wave,
Homeward with flying march where we poſſeſs
The Quarters of the North, there to prepare
Fit entertainment to receive our King
The great *Meſſiah,* and his new commands,
Who ſpeedily through all the Hierarchies
Intends to paſs triumphant, and give Laws.

So ſpake the falſe Arch-Angel, and infus'd
Bad influence into th' unwarie breſt
Of his Aſſociate; hee together calls,
Or ſeveral one by one, the Regent Powers,
Under him Regent, tells, as he was taught,
That the moſt High commanding, now ere Night,
Now ere dim Night had diſincumberd Heav'n,
The great Hierarchal Standard was to move;
Tells the ſuggeſted cauſe, and caſts between
Ambiguous words and jealouſies, to ſound
Or taint integritie; but all obey'd
The wonted ſignal, and ſuperior voice
Of thir great Potentate; for great indeed
His name, and high was his degree in Heav'n;
His count'nance, as the Morning Starr that guides
The ſtarrie flock, allur'd them, and with lyes
Drew after him the third part of Heav'ns Hoſt:
Mean while th' Eternal eye, whoſe ſight diſcernes
Abſtruſeſt thoughts, from forth his holy Mount
And from within the golden Lamps that burne
Nightly before him, ſaw without thir light
Rebellion riſing, ſaw in whom, how ſpred
Among the ſons of Morn, what multitudes
Were banded to oppoſe his high Decree;
And ſmiling to his onely Son thus ſaid.

Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In full reſplendence, Heir of all my might,
Neerly it now concernes us to be ſure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of Deitie or Empire, ſuch a foe
Is riſing, who intends to erect his Throne
Equal to ours, throughout the ſpacious North;
Nor ſo content, hath in his thought to try
In battel, what our Power is, or our right.
Let us adviſe, and to this hazard draw
With ſpeed what force is left, and all imploy
In our defence, leſt unawares we loſe
This our high place, our Sanctuarie, our Hill.

To whom the Son with calm aſpect and cleer
Light'ning Divine, ineffable, ſerene,
Made anſwer. Mightie Father, thou thy foes
Juſtly haſt in deriſion, and ſecure
Laugh'ſt at thir vain deſignes and tumults vain,
Matter to mee of Glory, whom thir hate
Illuſtrates, when they ſee all Regal Power
Giv'n me to quell thir pride, and in event
Know whether I be dextrous to ſubdue
Thy Rebels, or be found the worſt in Heav'n.

So ſpake the Son, but *Satan* with his Powers
Far was advanc't on winged ſpeed, an Hoſt
Innumerable as the Starrs of Night,
Or Starrs of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun
Impearls on every leaf and every flouer.
Regions they paſs'd, the mightie Regencies
Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones
In thir triple Degrees, Regions to which
All thy Dominion, *Adam,* is no more
Then what this Garden is to all the Earth,
And all the Sea, from one entire globoſe
Stretcht into Longitude; which having paſs'd
At length into the limits of the North
They came, and *Satan* to his Royal ſeat
High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount
Rais'd on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towrs
From Diamond Quarries hew'n, and Rocks of Gold▪
The Palace of great *Lucifer,* (ſo call
That Structure in the Dialect of men
Interpreted) which not long after, he
Affecting all equality with God,
In imitation of that Mount whereon
*Meſſiah* was declar'd in ſight of Heav'n,
The Mountain of the Congregation call'd;
For thither he aſſembl'd all his Train,
Pretending ſo commanded to conſult
About the great reception of thir King,
Thither to come, and with calumnious Art
Of counterfeted truth thus held thir ears.

Thrones, Dominations, Princedomes, Venues, Powers
If theſe magnific Titles yet remain
Not meerly titular, ſince by Decree
Another now hath to himſelf ingroſs't
All Power, and us eclipſt under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haſte
Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here,
This onely to conſult how we may beſt
With what may be devis'd of honours new
Receive him coming to receive from us
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, proſtration vile,
Too much to one, but double how endur'd
To one and to his image now proclaim'd?
But what if better counſels might erect
Our minds and teach us to caſt off this Yoke?
Will ye ſubmit your necks, and chuſe to bend
The ſupple knee? ye will not, if I truſt
To know ye right, or if ye know your ſelves
Natives and Sons of Heav'n poſſeſt before
By none, and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free; for Orders and Degrees
Jarr not with liberty, but well conſiſt.
Who can in reaſon then or right aſſume
Monarchie over ſuch as live by right
His equals, if in power and ſplendor leſs,
In freedome equal? or can introduce
Law and Edict on us, who without law
Erre not, much leſs for this to be our Lord,
And look for adoration to th' abuſe
Of thoſe Imperial Titles which aſſert
Our being ordain'd to govern, not to ſerve?

Thus farr his bold diſcourſe without controule
Had audience, when among the Seraphim
*Abdiel,* then whom none with more zeale ador'd
The Deitie, and divine commands obeid,
Stood up, and in a flame of zeale ſevere
The current of his fury thus oppos'd.

O argument blaſphemous, falſe and proud!
Words which no eare ever to hear in Heav'n
Expected, leaſt of all from thee, ingrate
In place thy ſelf ſo high above thy Peeres.
Canſt thou with impious obloquie condemne
The juſt Decree of God, pronounc't and ſworn,
That to his only Son by right endu'd
With Regal Scepter, every Soule in Heav'n
Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due
Confeſs him rightful King? unjuſt thou ſaiſt
Flatly unjuſt, to binde with Laws the free,
And equal over equals to let Reigne,
One over all with unſucceeded power.
Shalt thou give Law to God, ſhalt thou diſpute
With him the points of libertie, who made
Thee what thou art, and formd the Pow'rs of Heav'n
Such as he pleaſd, and circumſcrib'd thir being?
Yet by experience taught we know how good,
And of our good, and of our dignitie
How provident he is, how farr from thought
To make us leſs, bent rather to exalt
Our happie ſtate under one Head more neer
United. But to grant it thee unjuſt,
That equal over equals Monarch Reigne:
Thy ſelf though great and glorious doſt thou count,
Or all Angelic Nature joind in one,
Equal to him begotten Son, by whom
As by his Word the mighty Father made
All things, ev'n thee, and all the Spirits of Heav'n
By him created in thir bright degrees,
Crownd them with Glory, and to thir Glory nam'd
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
Eſſential Powers, nor by his Reign obſcur'd,
But more illuſtrious made, ſince he the Head
One of our number thus reduc't becomes,
His Laws our Laws; all honour to him done
Returns our own. Ceaſe then this impious rage,
And tempt not theſe; but haſt'n to appeaſe
Th' incenſed Father, and th' incenſed Son,
While Pardon may be found in time beſought.

So ſpake the fervent Angel, but his zeale
None ſeconded, as out of ſeaſon judg'd,
Or ſingular and raſh, whereat rejoic'd
Th' Apoſtat, and more haughty thus repli'd.
That we were formd then ſaiſt thou? and the work
Of ſecondarie hands, by task transferd
From Father to his Son? ſtrange point and new!
Doctrin which we would know whence learnt: who ſaw
When this creation was? rememberſt thou
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now;
Know none before us, ſelf-begot, ſelf-rais'd
By our own quick'ning power, when fatal courſe
Had circl'd his full Orbe, the birth mature
Of this our native Heav'n, Ethereal Sons.
Our puiſſance is our own, our own right hand
Shall teach us higheſt deeds, by proof to try
Who is our equal: then thou ſhalt behold
Whether by ſupplication we intend
Addreſs, and to begirt th' Almighty Throne
Beſeeching or beſieging. This report,
Theſe tidings carrie to th' anointed King;
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight.

He ſaid, and as the ſound of waters deep
Hoarce murmur echo'd to his words applauſe
Through the infinite Hoſt, nor leſs for that
The flaming Seraph fearleſs, though alone
Encompaſs'd round with foes, thus anſwerd bold.

O alienate from God, O ſpirit accurſt,
Forſak'n of all good; I ſee thy fall
Determind, and thy hapleſs crew involv'd
In this perfidious fraud, contagion ſpred
Both of thy crime and puniſhment: henceforth
No more be troubl'd how to quit the yoke
Of Gods *Meſſiah;* thoſe indulgent Laws
Will not be now voutſaf't, other Decrees
Againſt thee are gon forth without recall;
That Golden Scepter which thou didſt reject
Is now an Iron Rod to bruiſe and breake
Thy diſobedience. Well thou didſt adviſe,
Yet not for thy adviſe or threats I fly
Theſe wicked Tents devoted, leaſt the wrauth
Impendent, raging into ſudden flame
Diſtinguiſh not: for ſoon expect to feel
His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire.
Then who created thee lamenting learne,
When who can uncreate thee thou ſhalt know.

So ſpake the Seraph *Abdiel* faithful found,
Among the faithleſs, faithful only hee;
Among innumerable falſe, unmov'd,
Unſhak'n, unſeduc'd, unterrifi'd
His Loyaltie he kept, his Love, his Zeale;
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To ſwerve from truth, or change his conſtant mind
Though ſingle. From amidſt them forth he paſsd,
Long way through hoſtile ſcorn, which he ſuſteind
Superior, nor of violence fear'd aught;
And with retorted ſcorn his back he turn'd
On thoſe proud Towrs to ſwift deſtruction doom'd.
