---
position: 10
label: "Book X"
depth: 0
---
## BOOK X.

## THE ARGUMENT.

Mans tranſgreſſion known, the Guardian Angels forſake Paradiſe, and return up to Heaven to approve thir vigilance, and are approv'd, God declaring that The entrance of *Satan* could not be by them prevented. He ſends his Son to judge the Tranſgreſſors, who deſcends and gives Sentence accordingly; then in pity cloaths them both, and reaſcends. *Sin* and *Death* ſitting till then at the Gates of Hell, by wondrous ſympathie feeling the ſucceſs of *Satan* in this new World, and the ſin by Man there committed, reſolve to ſit no longer confin'd in Hell, but to follow *Satan* thir Sire up to the place of Man: To make the way eaſier from Hell to this World to and fro, they pave a broad Highway or Bridge over *Chaos,* according to the Track that *Satan* firſt made; then preparing for Earth, they meet him proud of his ſucceſs returning to Hell; thir mutual gratulation. *Satan* arrives at *Pandemonium,* in full of aſſembly relates with boaſting his ſucceſs againſt Man; inſtead of applauſe is entertained with a general hiſs by all his audience, transform'd with himſelf alſo ſuddenly into Serpents, according to his doom giv'n in Paradiſe; then deluded with a ſhew of the forbidden Tree ſpringing up before them, they greedily reaching to take of the Fruit, chew duſt and bitter aſhes. The proceedings of *Sin* and *Death;* God foretels the final Victory of his Son over them, and the renewing of all things; but for the preſent commands his Angels to make ſeveral alterations in the Heavens and Elements. *Adam* more and more perceiving his fall'n condition heavily bewailes, rejects the condolement of *Eve;* ſhe perſiſts and at length appeaſes him: then to evade the Curſe likely to fall on thir Ofspring, propoſes to *Adam* violent wayes which he approves not, but conceiving better hope, puts her in mind of the late Promiſe made them, that her Seed ſhould be reveng'd on the Serpent, and exhorts her with him to ſeek Peace of the offended Deity, by repentance and ſupplication.

MEanwhile the hainous and deſpightfull act
Of *Satan* done in Paradiſe, and how
Hee in the Serpent, had perverted *Eve,*
Her Husband ſhee, to taſte the fatall fruit,
Was known in Heav'n; for what can ſcape the Eye
Of God All-ſeeing, or deceave his Heart
Omniſcient, who in all things wiſe and juſt,
Hinder'd not *Satan* to attempt the minde
Of Man, with ſtrength entire, and free will arm'd,
Complete to have diſcover'd and repulſt
Whatever wiles of Foe or ſeeming Friend.
For ſtill they knew, and ought to have ſtill remember'd
The high Injunction not to taſte that Fruit,
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,
Incurr'd, what could they leſs, the penaltie,
And manifold in ſin, deſerv'd to fall.
Up into Heav'n from Paradiſe in haſte
Th' Angelic Guards aſcended, mute and ſad
For Man, for of his ſtate by this they knew,
Much wondring how the ſuttle Fiend had ſtoln
Entrance unſeen. Soon as th' unwelcome news
From Earth arriv'd at Heaven Gate, diſpleas'd
All were who heard, dim ſadneſs did not ſpare
That time Celeſtial viſages, yet mixt
With pitie, violated not thir bliſs.
About the new-arriv'd, in multitudes
Th' ethereal People ran, to hear and know
How all befell: they towards the Throne Supream
Accountable made haſte to make appear
With righteous plea, thir utmoſt vigilance,
And eaſily approv'd; when the moſt High
Eternal Father from his ſecret Cloud,
Amidſt in Thunder utter'd thus his voice.

Aſſembl'd Angels, and ye Powers return'd
From unſucceſsful charge, be not diſmaid,
Nor troubl'd at theſe tidings from the Earth,
Which your ſincereſt care could not prevent,
Foretold ſo lately what would come to paſs,
When firſt this Tempter croſs'd the Gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he ſhould prevail and ſpeed
On his bad Errand, Man ſhould be ſeduc't
And flatter'd out of all, believing lies
Againſt his Maker; no Decree of mine
Concurring to neceſſitate his Fall,
Or touch with lighteſt moment of impulſe
His free Will, to her own inclining left
In eevn ſcale. But fall'n he is, and now
What reſts but that the mortal Sentence paſs
On his tranſgreſſion Death denounc't that day,
Which he preſumes already vain and void,
Becauſe not yet inflicted, as he fear'd,
By ſome immediate ſtroak; but ſoon ſhall find
Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.
Juſtice ſhall not return as bountie ſcorn'd.
But whom ſend I to judge them? whom but thee
Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferr'd
All Judgement whether in Heav'n, or Earth, or Hell.
Eaſie it might be ſeen that I intend
Mercie collegue with Juſtice, ſending thee
Mans Friend, his Mediator, his deſign'd
Both Ranſom and Redeemer voluntarie,
And deſtin'd Man himſelf to judge Man fall'n.

So ſpake the Father, and unfoulding bright
Toward the right hand his Glorie, on the Son
Blaz'd forth unclouded Deitie; he full
Reſplendent all his Father manifeſt
Expreſs'd, and thus divinely anſwer'd milde.

Father Eternal, thine is to decree,
Mine both in Heav'n and Earth to do thy will
Supream, that thou in mee thy Son belov'd
Mayſt ever reſt well pleas'd. I go to judge
On Earth theſe thy tranſgreſſors, but thou knowſt,
Whoever judg'd, the worſt on mee muſt light,
When time ſhall be, for ſo I undertook
Before thee; and not repenting, this obtaine
Of right, that I may mitigate thir doom
On me deriv'd yet I ſhall temper ſo
Juſtice with Mercie, as may illuſtrate moſt
Them fully ſatisfied, and thee appeaſe.
Attendance none ſhall need, nor Train, where none
Are to behold the Judgment, but the judg'd,
Thoſe two; the third beſt abſent is condemn'd,
Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law
Conviction to the Serpent none belongs.

Thus ſaying, from his radiant Seat he roſe
Of high collateral glorie: him Thrones and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations miniſtrant
Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence
*Eden* and all the Coaſt in proſpect lay.
Down he deſcended ſtrait; the ſpeed of Gods
Time counts not, though with ſwifteſt minutes wing'd.
Now was the Sun in Weſtern cadence low
From Noon, and gentle Aires due at thir hour
To fan the Earth now wak'd, and uſher in
The Eevning coole when he from wrauth more coole
Came the mild Judge and Interceſſor both
To ſentence Man: the voice of God they heard
Now walking in the Garden, by ſoft windes
Brought to thir Ears, while day declin'd, they heard,
And from his preſence hid themſelves among
The thickeſt Trees, both Man and Wife, till God
Approaching, thus to *Adam* call'd aloud.

Where art thou *Adam,* wont with joy to meet
My coming ſeen far off? I miſs thee here.
Not pleas'd, thus entertaind with ſolitude,
Where obvious dutie erewhile appear'd unſaught:
Or come I leſs conſpicuous, or what change
Abſents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth.
He came, and with him *Eve,* more loth, though firſt
To offend, diſcount'nanc't both, and diſcompos'd;
Love was not in thir looks, either to God
Or to each other, but apparent guilt,
And ſhame, and perturbation, and deſpaire,
Anger, and obſtinacie, and hate, and guile.
Whence *Adam* faultring long, thus anſwer'd brief.

I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice
Affraid, being naked, hid my ſelf. To whom
The gracious Judge without revile repli'd.

My voice thou oft haſt heard, and haſt not fear'd,
But ſtill rejoyc't, how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who
Hath told thee? haſt thou eaten of the Tree
Whereof I gave thee charge thou ſhouldſt not eat?

To whom thus *Adam* ſore beſet repli'd.
O Heav'n! in evil ſtrait this day I ſtand
Before my Judge, either to undergoe
My ſelf the total Crime, or to accuſe
My other ſelf, the partner of my life;
Whoſe failing, while her Faith to me remaines,
I ſhould conceal, and not expoſe to blame
By my complaint; but ſtrict neceſſitie
Subdues me; and calamitous conſtraint
Leaſt on my head both ſin and puniſhment,
However inſupportable, be all
Devolv'd; though ſhould I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldſt eaſily detect what I conccale.
This Woman whom thou mad'ſt to be my help,
And gav'ſt me as thy perfet gift, ſo good,
So fit, ſo acceptable, ſo Divine,
That from her hand I could ſuſpect no ill,
And what ſhe did, whatever in it ſelf,
Her doing ſeem'd to juſtifie the deed;
Shee gave me of the Tree, and I did eate.

To whom the ſovran Preſence thus repli'd.
Was ſhee thy God, that her thou didſt obey
Before his voice, or was ſhee made thy guide,
Superior, or but equal, that to her
Thou did'ſt reſigne thy Manhood, and the Place
Wherein God ſet thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whoſe perfection farr excell'd
Hers in all real dignitie: Adornd
Shee was indeed, and lovely to attract
Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts
Were ſuch as under Government well ſeem'd,
Unſeemly to beare rule, which was thy part
And perſon, had'ſt thou known thy ſelf aright.

So having ſaid, he thus to *Eve* in few:
Say Woman, what is this which thou haſt done?

To whom ſad *Eve* with ſhame nigh overwhelm'd,
Confeſſing ſoon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abaſht repli'd.

The Serpent me beguil'd and I did eate.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To Judgement he proceeded on th' accus'd
Serpent though brute, unable to transferre
The Guilt on him who made him inſtrument
Of miſchief, and polluted from the end
Of his Creation; juſtly then accurſt,
As vitiated in Nature: more to know
Concern'd not Man (ſince he no further knew)
Nor alter'd his offence; yet God at laſt
To Satan firſt in ſin his doom apply'd,
Though in myſterious terms, judg'd as then beſt:
And on the Serpent thus his curſe let fall.

Becauſe thou haſt done this, thou art accurſt
Above all Cattle, each Beaſt of the Field;
Upon thy Belly groveling thou ſhalt goe,
And duſt ſhalt eat all the dayes of thy Life.
Between Thee and the Woman I will put
Enmitie, and between thine and her Seed;
Her Seed ſhall bruſe thy head, thou bruiſe his heel.

So ſpake this Oracle, then verifi'd
When *Jeſus* ſon of *Mary* ſecond *Eve,*
Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heav'n,
Prince of the Aire; then riſing from his Grave
Spoild Principalities and Powers, triumpht
In open ſhew, and with aſcention bright
Captivity led captive through the Aire,
The Realm it ſelf of Satan long uſurpt,
Whom he ſhall tread at laſt under our feet;
Eevn hee who now foretold his fatal bruiſe,
And to the Woman thus his Sentence turn'd.

Thy ſorrow I will greatly multiplie
By thy Conception; Children thou ſhalt bring
In ſorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will
Thine ſhall ſubmit, hee over thee ſhall rule.

On *Adam* laſt thus judgement he pronounc'd.
Becauſe thou haſt heark'nd to the voice of thy Wife,
And eaten of the Tree concerning which
I charg'd thee, ſaying: Thou ſhalt not eate thereof,
Curs'd is the ground for thy ſake, thou in ſorrow
Shalt eate thereof all the days of thy Life;
Thorns alſo and Thiſtles it ſhall bring thee forth
Unbid, and thou ſhalt eate th' Herb of th' Field,
In the ſweat of thy Face ſhalt thou eat Bread,
Till thou return unto the ground, for thou
Out of the ground waſt taken, know thy Birth,
For duſt thou art, and ſhalt to duſt returne.

So judg'd he Man, both Judge and Saviour ſent,
And th• inſtant ſtroke of Death denounc't that day
Remov'd farr off, then pittying how they ſtood
Before him naked to the aire, that now
Muſt ſuffer change, diſdain'd not to begin
Thenceforth the form of ſervant to aſſume,
As when he waſh'd his ſervants feet ſo now
As Father of his Familie he clad
Thir nakedneſs with Skins of Beaſts, or ſlain,
Or as the Snake with youthful Coate repaid;
And thought not much to cloath his Enemies:
Nor hee thir outward onely with the Skins
Of Beaſts, but inward nakedneſs, much more
Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteouſneſs,
Araying cover'd from his Fathers ſight.
To him with ſwift aſcent he up returnd,
Into his bliſsful boſom reaſſum'd
In glory as of old, to him appeas'd
All, though all-knowing, what had paſt with Man
Recounted, mixing interceſſion ſweet.
Meanwhile ere thus was ſin'd and judg'd on Earth,
Within the Gates of Hell ſate Sin and Death,
In counterview within the Gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Farr into *Chaos,* ſince the Fiend paſs'd through,
Sin opening, who thus now to Death began.

O Son, why ſit we here each other viewing
Idlely, while Satan our great Author thrives
In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides
For us his ofspring deare? It cannot be
But that ſucceſs attends him; if miſhap,
Ere this he had return'd, with fury driv'n
By his Avengers, ſince no place like this
Can fit his puniſhment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new ſtrength within me riſe,
Wings growing, and Dominion giv'n me large
Beyond this Deep; whatever drawes me on,
Or ſympathie, or ſom connatural force
Powerful at greateſt diſtance to unite
With ſecret amiry things of like kinde
By ſecreteſt conveyance. Thou my Shade
Inſeparable muſt with mee along:
For Death from Sin no power can ſeparate.
But leaſt the difficultie of paſſing back
Stay his return perhaps over this Gulfe
Impaſſable, Impervious, let us try
Adventrous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this Maine from Hell to that new World
Where Satan now prevailes, a Monument
Of merit high to all th' infernal Hoſt,
Eaſing thir paſſage hence, for intercourſe,
Or tranſmigration, as thir lot ſhall lead.
Nor can I miſs the way, ſo ſtrongly drawn
By this new felt attraction and inſtinct.

Whom thus the meager Shadow anſwerd ſoon.
Goe whither Fate and inclination ſtrong
Leads thee, I ſhall not lag behinde, nor erre
The way, thou leading, ſuth a ſent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taſte
The ſavour of Death from all things there that live:
Nor ſhall I to the work thou enterpriſeſt
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid,

So ſaying, with delight he ſnuff'd the ſmell
Of mortal change on Earth. As when a flock
Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote,
Againſt the day of Battel, to a Field,
Where Armies lie encampt, come flying, lur'd
With ſent of living Carcaſſes deſign'd
For death, the following day, in bloodie fight.
So ſented the grim Feature, and upturn'd
His Noſtril wide into the murkie Air,
Sagacious of his Quarry from ſo farr.
Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waſte
Wide Anarchie of *Chaos* damp and dark
Flew divers, and with Power (thir Power was great)
Hovering upon the Waters; what they met
Solid or ſlimie, as in raging Sea
Toſt up and down, together crowded drove
From each ſide ſhoaling towards the mouth of Hell.
As when two Polar Winds blowing adverſe
Upon the *Cronian* Sea, together drive
Mountains of Ice, that ſtop th' imagin'd way
Beyond *Petſora* Eaſtward, to the rich
*Cathaian* Coaſt. The aggregated Soyle
Death with his Mace petrific, cold and dry,
As with a Trident ſmote, and fix't as firm
As *Delos* floating once; the reſt his look
Bound with *Gorgonian* rigor not to move,
And with *Aſphaltic* ſlime, broad as the Gate,
Deep to the Roots of Hell the gather'd beach
They faſten'd, and the Mole immenſe wraught on
Over the foaming deep high Archt, a Bridge
Of length prodigious joying to the Wall
Immovable of this now fenceleſs world
Forfeit to Death from hence a paſſage broad,
Smooth, eaſie, inoffenſive down to Hell.
So, if great thing to ſmall may be compar'd,
*Xerxes;* the Libertie of *Greece* to yoke,
From *Suſa* his *Momronian* Palace high
Came to the Sea, and over *Helleſpont*
Bridging his way *Europe* with *Aſia* joyn'd,
And ſcourg'd with many a ſtroak th' indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock
Over the vext Abyſs, following the track
Of *Satan▪* to the ſelf ſame place where hee
Firſt lighted from his Wing, and landed ſafe
From out of *Chaos* to the out ſide bare
Of this round World: with Pinns of Adamant
And Chains they made all faſt, too faſt they made
And durable; and now in little ſpace
The confines met of Empyrean Heav'n
And of this World, and on the left hand Hell
With long reach interpos'd; three ſev'ral wayes
In ſight, to each of theſe three places led.
And now thir way to Earth they had deſcri'd,
To Paradiſe firſt tending; when behold
*Satan* in likeneſs of an Angel bright
Betwixt the *Centaure* and the *Scorpion* ſtearing
His *Zenith,* while the Sun in *Aries* roſe:
Diſguis'd he came, but thoſe his Children dear
Thir Parent ſoon diſcern'd, though in diſguiſe.
Hee after *Eve* ſeduc't, unminded ſlunk
Into the Wood faſt by, and changing ſhape
To obſerve the ſequel, ſaw his guileful act
By *Eve,* though all unweeting, ſeconded
Upon her Husband, ſaw thir ſhame that ſought
Vain covertures; but when he ſaw deſcend
The Son of God to judge them terrifi'd
Hee fled, not hoping to eſcape, but ſhun
The preſent, fearing guiltie what his wrauth
Might ſuddenly inflict; that paſt, return'd
By Night, and liſtening where the hapleſs Paire
Sate in thir ſad diſcourſe, and various plaint,
Thence gatherd his own doom, which underſtood
Not inſtant, but of future time. With joy
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now return'd,
And at the brink of *Chaos,* neer the foot
Of this new wondrous Pontifice, unhop't
Met who to meet him came, his Ofspring dear.
Great joy was at thir meeting, and at ſight
Of that ſtupendious Bridge his joy encreas'd.
Long hee admiring ſtood, till Sin, his faire
Inchanting Daughter, thus the ſilence broke.

O Parent, theſe are thy magnific deeds,
Thy Trophies, which thou view'ſt as not thine own,
Thou art thir Author and prime Architect:
For I no ſooner in my Heart divin'd,
My Heart, which by a ſecret harmonie
Still moves with thine, join'd in connexion ſweet,
That thou on Earth hadſt proſper'd, which thy looks
Now alſo evidence, but ſtraight I felt
Though diſtant from thee Worlds between, yet felt
That I muſt after thee with this thy Son;
Such fatal conſequence unites us three:
Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obſcure
Detain from following thy illuſtrious track.
Thou haſt atchiev'd our libertie, confin'd
Within Hell Gates till now, thou us impow'rd
To fortifie thus farr, and overlay
With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyſs.
Thine now is an this World, thy vertue hath won
What thy hands builded not, thy Wiſdom gain'd
With odds what Warr hath loſt, and fully aveng'd
Our foile in Heav'n; here thou ſhalt Monarch reign,
There didſt not; there let him ſtill Victor ſway,
As Battel hath adjudg'd, from this new World
Retiring, by his own doom alienated,
And henceforth Monarchie with thee divide
Of all things parted by th' Empyreal bounds,
His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World,
Or trie thee now more dang'rous to his Throne.

Whom thus the Prince of Darkneſs anſwerd glad.
Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both,
High proof ye now have giv'n to be the Race
Of *Satan* (for I glorie in the name,
Antagoniſt of Heav'ns Almightie King)
Amply have merited of me, of all
Th' infernal Empire, that ſo neer Heav'ns dore
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
Mine with this glorious Work, and made one Realm
Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent
Of eaſie thorough-fare. Therefore while I
Deſcend through Darkneſs, on your Rode with eaſe
To my aſſociate Powers, them to acquaint
With theſe ſucceſſes, and with them rejoyce,
You two this way, among theſe numerous Orbs
All yours, right down to Paradiſe deſcend;
There dwell and Reign in bliſs, thence on the Earth
Dominion exerciſe and in the Aire,
Chiefly on Man, ſole Lord of all declar'd,
Him firſt make ſure your thrall, and laſtly kill.
My Subſtitutes I ſend ye, and Create
Plenipotent on Earth, of matchleſs might
Iſſuing from mee: on your joynt vigor now
My hold of this new Kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death expos'd by my exploit.
If your joynt power prevailes, th' affaires of Hell
No detriment need feare, goe and be ſtrong.

So ſaying he diſmiſs'd them, they with ſpeed
Thir courſe through thickeſt Conſtellations held
Spreading thir bane; the blaſted Starrs lookt wan,
And Planets, Planet-ſtrook, real Eclips
Then ſufferd. Th' other way *Satan* went down
The Cauſey to Hell Gate; on either ſide
Diſparted *Chaos* over built exclaimd,
And with rebounding ſurge the barrs aſſaild,
That ſcorn'd his indignation: through the Gate,
Wide open and unguarded, *Satan* paſs'd,
And all about found deſolate; for thoſe
Appointed to ſit there, had left thir charge,
Flown to the upper World; the reſt were all
Farr to the inland retir'd, about the walls
Of *Pandaemonium,* Citie and proud ſeate
Of *Lucifer,* ſo by alluſion calld,
Of that bright Starr to *Satan* paragond.
There kept thir Watch the Legions, while the Grand
In Council ſate, ſollicitous what chance
Might intercept thir Emperour ſent, ſo hee
Departing gave command, and they obſerv'd.
As when the *Tartar* from his *Ruſſian* Foe
By *Aſtracan* over the Snowie Plaines
Retires, or *Bactri••* Sophi from the hornes
Of *Turkiſh* Creſcent, leaves all waſte beyond
The Realm of *Aladule,* in his retreate
To *Tauris* or *Casbeen.* So theſe the late
Heav'n-baniſht Hoſt, left deſert utmoſt Hell
Many a dark League, reduc't in careful Watch
Round thir Metropolis, and now expecting
Each hour their great adventurer from the ſearch
Of Forrein Worlds: he through the midſt unmarkt,
In ſhew Plebeian Angel militant
Of loweſt order, paſt; and from the dore
Of that *Plutonian* Hall, inviſible
Aſcended his high Throne, which under ſtate
Of richeſt texture ſpred, at th' upper end
Was plac't in regal luſtre. Down a while
He ſate, and round about him ſaw unſeen:
At laſt as from a Cloud his fulgent head
And ſhape Starr bright appeer'd, or brighter, clad
With what permiſſive glory ſince his fall
Was left him, or falſe glitter: All amaz'd
At that ſo ſudden blaze the *Stygian* throng
Bent thir aſpect, and whom they wiſh'd beheld,
Thir mighty Chief returnd: loud was th' acclaime:
Forth ruſh'd in haſte the great conſulting Peers,
Rais'd from thir Dark *Divan,* and with like joy
Congratulant approach'd him, who with hand
Silence, and with theſe words attention won.

Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
For in poſſeſſion ſuch, not onely of right,
I call ye and declare ye now, returnd
Succeſsful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
Triumphant out of this infernal Pit
Abominable, accurſt, the houſe of woe,
And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now poſſeſs▪
As Lords, a ſpacious World, to our native Heaven
Little inferiour, by my adventure hard
With peril great atchiev'd. Long were to tell
What I have don, what ſufferd, with what paine
Voyag'd th' unreal, vaſt, unbounded deep
Of horrible confuſion, over which
By Sin and Death a broad way now is pav'd
To expedite your glorious march; but I
Toild out my uncouth paſſage, forc't to ride
Th' untraceable Abyſſe, plung'd in the womb
Of unoriginal *Night* and *Chaos* wilde,
That jealous of thir ſecrets fiercely oppos'd
My journey ſtrange, with clamorous uproare
Proteſting Fate ſupreame; thence how I found
The new created World, which ſame in Heav'n
Long had foretold, a Fabrick wonderful
Of abſolute perfection, therein Man
Plac't in a Paradiſe, by our exile
Made happie: Him by fraud I have ſeduc'd
From his Creator, and the more to increaſe
Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat
Offended, worth your laughter, hath giv'n up
Both his beloved Man and all his World,
To Sin and Death a prey, and ſo to us,
Without our hazard, labour, or allarme,
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man
To rule, as over all he ſhould have rul'd.
True is, mee alſo he hath judg'd, or rather
Mee not, but the brute Serpent in whoſe ſhape
Man I deceav'd: that which to mee belongs,
Is enmity, which he will put between
Mee and Mankinde; I am to bruiſe his heel;
His Seed, when is not ſet, ſhall bruiſe my head:
A World who would not purchaſe with a bruiſe,
Or much more grievous pain? Ye have th' account
Of my performance: What remains, ye Gods,
But up and enter now into full bliſs.

So having ſaid, a while he ſtood, expecting
Thir univerſal ſhout and high applauſe
To fill his eare, when contrary he hears
On all ſides, from innumerable tongues
A diſmal univerſal hiſs, the ſound
Of public ſcorn; he wonderd, but not long
Had leaſure, wondring at himſelf now more;
His Viſage drawn he felt to ſharp and ſpare,
His Armes clung to his Ribs, his Leggs entwining
Each other, till ſupplanted down he fell
A monſtrous Serpent on his Belly prone,
Reluctant, but in vaine, a greater power
Now rul'd him, puniſht in the ſhape he ſin'd,
According to his doom: he would have ſpoke,
But hiſs for hiſs returnd with forked tongue
To forked tongue, for now were all transform'd
Alike, to Serpents all as acceſſories
To his bold Riot: dreadful was the din
Of hiſſing through the Hall, thick ſwarming now
With complicated monſters head and taile,
Scorpion and Aſp, and *Amphisbaena* dire,
*Ceraſtes* hornd, *Hydrus,* and *Ellops* drear,
And *Dipſas* (not ſo thick ſwarm'd once the Soil
Bedropt with blood of *Gorgon,* or the Iſle
*Ophiuſa*) but ſtill greateſt hee the midſt,
Now Dragon grown, larger then whom the Sun
Ingenderd in the *Pythian* Vale on ſlime,
Huge *Python,* and his Power no leſs he ſeem'd
Above the reſt ſtill to retain; they all
Him follow'd iſſuing forth to th' open Field,
Where all yet left of that revolted Rout
Heav'n-fall'n, in ſtation ſtood or juſt array,
Sublime with expectation when to ſee
In Triumph iſſuing forth thir glorious Chief;
They ſaw, but other ſight inſtead, a crowd
Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell,
And horrid ſympathie; for what they ſaw,
They felt themſelvs now changing; down thir arms,
Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as faſt,
And the dire hiſs renew'd, and the dire form
Catcht by Contagion, like in puniſhment,
As in thir crime. Thus was th' applauſe they meant,
Turnd to exploding hiſs, triumph to ſhame
Caſt on themſelves from thir own mouths. There ſtood
A Grove hard by, ſprung up with this thir change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Thir penance, laden with Fruit like that
Which grew in Paradiſe, the bait of *Eve*
Us'd by the Tempter: on that proſpect ſtrange
Thir earneſt eyes they fix'd, imagining
For one forbidden Tree a multitude
Now ris'n, to work them furder woe or ſhame;
Yet parcht with ſcalding thurſt and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them ſent, could not abſtain,
But on thy rould in heaps, and up the Trees
Climbing, ſat thicker then the ſnakie locks
That curld *Megaera:* greedily they pluck'd
The Frutage fair to ſight, like that which grew
Neer that bituminous Lake where *Sodom* flam'd;
This more deluſive, not the touch, but taſte
Deceav'd; they fondly thinking to allay
Thir appetite with guſt, inſtead of Fruit
Chewd bitter Aſhes, which th' offended taſte
With ſpattering noiſe rejected: oft they aſſayd,
Hunger and thirſt conſtraining, drugd as oft,
With hatefulleſt diſreliſh writh'd thir jaws
With ſoot and cinders fill'd; ſo oft they fell
Into the ſame illuſion, not as Man
Whom they triumph'd once lapſt. Thus were they plagu'd
And worn with Famin, long and ceaſleſs hiſs,
Till thir loſt ſhape, permitted, they reſum'd,
Yearly enjoynd, ſome ſay, to undergo
This annual humbling certain number'd days,
To daſh thir pride, and joy for Man ſeduc't.
However ſome tradition they diſpers'd
Among the Heathen of thir purchaſe got,
And Fabl'd how the Serpent, whom they calld
*Ophion* with *Eurynome,* the wide
Encroaching *Eve* perhaps, had firſt the rule
Of high *Olympus,* thence by *Saturn* driv'n
And *Ops,* ere yet *Dictaen Jove* was born.
Mean while in Paradiſe the helliſh pair
Too ſoon arriv'd, *Sin* there in power before,
Once actual, now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant; behind her *Death*
Cloſe following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale Horſe: to whom *Sin* thus began.

Second of *Satan* ſprung, all conquering *Death,*
What thinkſt thou of our Empire now, though earnd
With travail difficult, not better farr
Then ſtil at Hels dark threſhold to have ſate watch,
Unnam'd, undreaded, and thy ſelf half ſtarv'd?

Whom thus the Sin-born Monſter anſwerd ſoon.
To mee, who with eternal Famin pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradiſe, or Heaven,
There beſt, where moſt with ravin I may meet;
Which here, though plenteous, all too little ſeems
To ſtuff this Maw, this vaſt unhide-bound Corps.

To whom th' inceſtuous Mother thus repli'd.
Thou therefore on theſe Herbs, and Fruits, and Flours
Feed firſt, on each Beaſt next, and Fiſh, and Fowle,
No homely morſels, and whatever thing
The Sithe of Time mowes down, devour unſpar'd,
Till I in Man reſiding through the Race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect,
And ſeaſon him thy laſt and ſweeteſt prey.

This ſaid, they both betook them ſeveral wayes,
Both to deſtroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for deſtruction to mature
Sooner or later; which th' Almightie ſeeing,
From his tranſcendent Seat the Saints among,
To thoſe bright Orders utterd thus his voice.

See with what heat theſe Dogs of Hell advance
To waſte and havoc yonder World, which I
So fair and good created, and had ſtill
Kept in that State, had not the folly of Man
Let in theſe waſtful Furies, who impute
Folly to mee, ſo doth the Prince of Hell
And his Adherents, that with ſo much eaſe
I ſuffer them to enter and poſſeſs
A place ſo heav'nly, and conniving ſeem
To gratifie my ſcornful Enemie•,
That laugh, as if tranſported with ſome fit
Of Paſſion, I to them had quitted all,
At random yielded up to their miſrule;
And know not that I call'd and drew them thither
My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth
Which mans polluting Sin with taint hath ſhed
On what was pure, till cramm'd and gorg'd, nigh burſt
With ſuckt and glutted offal, at one ſling
Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleaſing Son,
Both *Sin,* and *Death,* and yawning *Grave* at laſt
Through *Chaos* hurld, obſtruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and ſeal up his ravenous Jawes.
Then Heav'n and Earth renewd ſhall be made pure
To ſanctitie that ſhall receive no ſtaine:
Till then the Curſe pronounc't on both precedes.

He ended, and the heav'nly Audience loud
Sung *Halleluia,* as the ſound of Seas,
Through multitude that ſung: Juſt are thy ways,
Righteous are thy Decrees on all thy Works;
Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son,
Deſtin'd reſtorer of Mankind, by whom
New Heav'n and Earth ſhall to the Ages riſe,
Or down from Heav'n deſcend. Such was thir ſong,
While the Creator calling forth by name
His mightie Angels gave them ſeveral charge,
As ſorted beſt with preſent things. The Sun
Had firſt his precept ſo to move, ſo ſhine,
As might affect the Earth with cold and heat
Scarce tollerable, and from the North to call
Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring
Solſtitial ſummers heat. To the blanc Moone
Her office they preſcrib'd, to th' other five
Thir planetarie motions and aſpects
In *Sextile, Square,* and *Trine,* and *Oppoſite,*
Of noxious efficacie, and when to joyne
In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixt
Thir influence malignant when to ſhowre,
Which of them riſing with the Sun, or falling,
Should prove tempeſtuous: To the Winds they ſet
Thir corners, when with bluſter to confound
Sea, Aire, and Shoar, the Thunder when to rowle
With terror through the dark Aereal Hall.
Some ſay he bid his Angels turne aſcanſe
The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more
From the Suns Axle; they with labour puſh'd
Oblique the Centric Globe: Som ſay the Sun
Was bid turn Reines from th' Equinoctial Rode
Like diſtant breadth to *Taurus* with the Seav'n
*Atlantick* Siſters, and the *Spartan* Twins
Up to the *Tropic* Crab; thence down amaine
By *Leo* and the *Virgin* and the *Scales,*
A deep as *Capricorne,* to bring in change
Of Seaſons to each Clime; elſe had the Spring
Perpetual ſmil'd on Earth with vernant Flours,
Equal in Days and Nights, except to thoſe
Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day
Had unbenighted ſhon, while the low Sun
To recompence his diſtance, in thir ſight
Had rounded ſtill th' *Horizon,* and not known
Or Eaſt or Weſt▪ which had forbid the Snow
From cold *Eſtotiland,* and South as farr
Beneath *Magellan.* At that taſted Fruit
The Sun, as from *Thyeſtean* Banquet, turn'd
His courſe intended; elſe how had the World
Inhabited, though ſinleſs, more then now,
Avoided pinching cold and ſcorching heate?
Theſe changes in the Heav'ns, though ſlow, produc'd
Like change on Sea and Land, ſideral blaſt,
Vapour, and Miſt, and Exhalation hot,
Corrupt and Peſtilent: Now from the North
Of *Normbega,* and the *Samoed* ſhoar
Burſting thir brazen Dungeon, armd with ice
And ſnow and haile and ſtormie guſt and flaw,
*Boreas* and *Caecias* and *Argeſtes* loud
And *Thraſcias* rend the Woods and Seas upturn;
With adverſe blaſt up-turns them from the South
*Notus* and *Afer* black with thundrous Clouds
From *Serraliona;* thwart of theſe as fierce
Forth ruſh the *Levant* and the *Ponent* Windes
*Eurus* and *Zephir* with thir lateral noiſe,
*Sirocco,* and *Libecchio,* Thus began
Outrage from liveleſs things; but Diſcord firſt
Daughter of Sin, among th' irrational,
Death introduc'd through fierce antipathie:
Beaſt now with Bead gan war, and Fowle with Fowle,
And Fiſh with Fiſh; to graze the Herb all leaving,
Devourd each other; nor ſtood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him, or with count'nance grim
Glar'd on him paſſing: theſe were from without
The growing miſeries, which *Adam* ſaw
Alreadie in part, though hid in gloomieſt ſhade,
To ſorrow abandond, but worſe felt within,
And in a troubl'd Sea of paſſion toſt,
Thus to disburd'n ſought with ſad complaint.

O miſerable of happie! is this the end
Of this new glorious World, and mee ſo late
The Glory of that Glory, who now becom
Accurſt of bleſſed, hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth
Of happineſs: yet well, if here would end
The miſerie, I deſerv'd it, and would beare
My own deſervings; but this will nor ſerve;
All that I eat or drink, or ſhall beget,
Is propagated curſe. O voice once heard
Delightfully, *Encreaſe and multiply,*
Now death to heare! for what can I encreaſe
Or multiplie, but curſes on my head?
Who of all Ages to ſucceed, but feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curſe
My Head, Ill fare our Anceſtor impure,
For this we may thank *Adam;* but his thanks
Shall be the execration; ſo beſides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from mee
Shall with a fierce reflux on mee redound,
On mee as on thir natural center light
Heavie, though in thir place. O fleeting joyes
Of Paradiſe, deare bought with laſting woes!
Did I requeſt thee, Maker, from my Clay
To mould me Man, did I ſollicite thee
From darkneſs to promote me, or here place
In this delicious Garden? as my Will
Concurd not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my duſt,
Deſirous to reſigne, and render back
All I receav'd, unable to performe
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I ſought not. To the loſs of that,
Sufficient penaltie, why haſt thou added
The ſenſe of endleſs woes? inexplicable
Thy Juſtice ſeems; yet to ſay truth, too late,
I thus conteſt; then ſhould have been refuſd
Thoſe terms whatever, when they were propos'd:
Thou didſt accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil the conditions? and though God
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son
Prove diſobedient, and reprov'd, retort,
Wherefore didſt thou beget me? I ſought it not
Wouldſt thou admit for his contempt of thee
That proud excuſe? yet him not thy election,
But Natural neceſſity begot.
God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
To ſerve him, thy reward was of his grace,
Thy puniſhment then juſtly is at his Will.
Be it ſo, for I ſubmit, his doom is fair,
That duſt I am, and ſhall to duſt returne:
O welcom hour whenever! why delayes
His hand to execute what his Decree
Fixd on this day? why do I overlive,
Why am I mockt with death, and length'nd out
To deathleſs pain? how gladly would I meet
Mortalitie my ſentence, and be Earth▪
Inſenſible, how glad would lay me down
As in my Mothers lap? there I ſhould teſt
And ſleep ſecure; his dreadful voice no more
Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worſe
To mee and to my ofspring would torment me
With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt
Purſues me ſtill, leaſt all I cannot die,
Leaſt that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man
Which God inſpir'd, cannot together periſh
With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave,
Or in ſome other diſmal place who knows
But I ſhall die a living Death? O thought
Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath
Of Life that ſinn'd; what dies but what had life
And ſin? the Bodie properly hath neither.
All of me then ſhall die: let this appeaſe
The doubt ſince humane reach no further knows,
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrauth alſo? be it, man is not ſo,
But mortal doom'd. How can he exerciſe
Wrath without end on Man whom Death muſt end?
Can he make deathleſs Death? that were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himſelf
Impoſſible is held, as Argument
Of weakneſs, not of Power. Will he, draw out,
For angers ſake, finite to infinite
In puniſht man, to ſatisfie his rigour
Satisfi'd never; that were to extend
His Sentence beyond duſt and Natures Law,
By which all Cauſes elſe according ſtill
To the reception of thir matter act,
Not to th' extent of thir own Spheare. But ſay
That Death be not one ſtroak, as I ſuppos'd,
Bereaving ſenſe, but endleſs miſerie
From this day onward, which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me, and ſo laſt
To perpetuitie; Ay me, that fear
Comes thundring back with dreadful revolution
On my defenſleſs head; both Death and I
Am ſound Eternal, and incorporate both,
Nor I on my part ſingle, in mee all
Poſteritie ſtands curſt: Fair Patrimonie
That I muſt leave ye, Sons; O were I able
To waſte it all my ſelf, and leave ye none!
So diſinherited how would ye bleſs
Me now your curſe! Ah, why ſhould all mankind
For one mans fault thus guiltleſs be condemn'd,
If guiltleſs? But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt, both Mind and Will deprav'd,
Not to do onely, but to will the ſame
With me? how can they then acquitted ſtand
In ſight of God? Him after all Diſputes
Forc't I abſolve: all my evaſions vain,
And reaſonings, though through Mazes, lead me ſtill
But to my own conviction: firſt and laſt
On mee, mee onely, as the fourſe and ſpring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;
So might the wrauth. Fond wiſh! couldſt thou ſupport
That burden heavier then the Earth to bear
Then all the World much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman? Thus what thou deſir'ſt
And what thou fearſt, alike deſtroyes all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miſerable
Beyond all paſt example and future,
To *Satan* only like both crime and doom.
O Conſcience, into what Abyſs of fears
And horrors haſt thou driv'n me; out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plung'd!

Thus *Adam* to himſelf lamented loud
Through the ſtill Night, not now, as ere man fell,
Wholſom and cool, and mild, but with black Air
Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom,
Which to his evil Conſcience repreſented
All things with double terror: On the Ground
Outſtretcht he lay, on the cold ground, and oft
Curs'd his Creation, Death as oft accus'd
Of tardie execution, ſince denounc't
The day of his offence. Why comes not Death,
Said hee, with one thrice acceptable ſtroke
To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Juſtice Divine not haſt'n to be juſt?
But Death comes not at call, Juſtice Divine
Mends not her ſloweſt pace for prayers or cries.
O Woods, O Fountains, Hillocks, Dales and Bowrs,
With other echo late I taught your Shades
To anſwer, and reſound farr other Song.
Whom thus afflicted when ſad *Eve* beheld,
Deſolate where ſhe ſate, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce paſſion ſhe aſſay'd:
But her with ſtern regard he thus repell'd.

Out of my ſight, thou Serpent, that name beſt
Befits thee with him leagu'd, thy ſelf as falſe
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy ſhape,
Like his, and colour Serpentine may ſhew
Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee
Henceforth; leaſt that too heav'nly form, pretended
To helliſh falſhood, ſnare them. But for thee
I had perſiſted happie, had not thy pride
And wandring vanitie, when leſt was ſafe,
Rejected my forewarning, and diſdain'd
Not to be truſted, longing to be ſeen
Though by the Devil himſelf, him overweening
To over-reach, but with the Serpent meeting
Fool'd and beguil'd, by him thou, I by thee,
To truſt thee from my ſide, imagin'd wiſe,
Conſtant, mature, proof againſt all aſſaults,
And underſtood not all was but a ſhew
Rather then ſolid vertu, all but a Rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part ſiniſter from me drawn,
Well if thrown out, as ſupernumerarie
To my juſt number found. O why did God,
Creator wiſe, that peopl'd higheſt Heav'n
With Spirits Maſculine, create at laſt
This noveltie on Earth, this fair defect
Of Nature, and not fill the World at once
With Men as Angels without Feminine,
Or find ſome other way to generate
Mankind? this miſchief had not then befall'n,
And more that ſhall befall, innumerable
Diſturbances on Earth through Femal ſnares,
And ſtraight conjunction with this Sex: for either
He never ſhall find out fit Mate, but ſuch
As ſome misfortune brings him, or miſtake,
Or whom he wiſhes mod ſhall ſeldom gain
Through her perverſneſs, but ſhall ſee her gaind
By a farr worſe, or if ſhe love, withheld
By Parents, or his happieſt choice too late
Shall meet, alreadie linkt and Wedlock-bound
To a fell Adverſarie, his hate or ſhame:
Which infinite calamine ſhall cauſe
To Humane life, and houſhold peace confound.

He added not, and from her turn'd, but *Eve*
Not ſo repulſt, with Tears that ceas'd not flowing,
And treſſes all diſorderd, at his feet
Fell humble, and imbracing them, beſaught
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.

Forſake me not thus, *Adam,* witneſs Heav'n
What love ſincere, and reverence in my heart
I beare thee, and unweeting have offended,
Unhappilie deceav'd; thy ſuppliant
I beg, and claſp thy knees; bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counſel in this uttermoſt diſtreſs,
My onely ſtrength and ſtay: forlorn of thee,
Whither ſhall I betake me, where ſubſiſt?
While yet we live, ſcarſe one ſhort hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace, both joyning,
As joyn'd in injuries, one enmitie
Againſt a Foe by doom expreſs aſſign'd us,
That cruel Serpent: On me exerciſe not
Thy hatred for this miſerie befall'n,
On me alreadie loſt, mee then thy ſelf
More miſerable; both have ſin'd, but thou
Againſt God onely, I againſt God and thee,
And to the place of judgment will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven, that all
The ſentence from thy head remov'd may ligh.
On me, ſole cauſe to thee of all this woe,
Mee mee onely juſt object of his ire.

She ended weeping, and her lowlie plight,
Immoveable till peace obtain'd from fault
Acknowledg'd and deplor'd, in *Adam* wraught
Commiſeration; ſoon his heart relented
Towards her, his life ſo late and ſole delight,
Now at his feet ſubmiſſive in diſtreſs,
Creature ſo faire his reconcilement ſeeking,
His counſel whom ſhe had diſpleas'd, his aide;
As one diſarm'd, his anger all he loſt,
And thus with peaceful words uprais'd her ſoon.

Unwarie, and too deſirous, as before,
So now of what thou knowſt not, who deſir'ſt
The puniſhment all on thy ſelf; alas,
Beare thine own firſt, ill able to ſuſtaine
His full wrauth whoſe thou feelſt as yet leſt part,
And my diſpleaſure bearſt ſo ill. If Prayers
Could alter high Decrees, I to that place
Would ſpeed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be viſited,
Thy frailtie and infirmer Sex forgiv'n,
To me committed and by me expos'd.
But riſe, let us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blam'd enough elſewhere, but ſtrive
In offices of Love, how we may light'n
Each others burden in our ſhare of woe;
Since this days Death denounc't, if ought I ſee,
Will prove no ſudden, but a ſlow pac't evill,
A long days dying to augment our paine,
And to our Seed (O hapleſs Seed!) deriv'd.

To whom thus *Eve,* recovering heart, repli'd.
*Adam,* by ſad experiment I know
How little weight my words with thee can finde,
Found ſo erroneous, thence by juſt event
Found ſo unfortunate; nevertheleſs,
Reſtor'd by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regaine
Thy Love, the ſole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breſt are ris'n,
Tending to ſome relief of our extremes,
Or end, though ſharp and ſad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of eaſier choice.
If care of our deſcent perplex us moſt,
Which muſt be born to certain woe, devourd
By Death at laſt, and miſerable it is
To be to others cauſe of miſery,
Our own begotten, and of our Loines to bring
Into this curſed World a woful Race,
That after wretched Life muſt be at laſt
Food for ſo foule a Monſter, in thy power
It lies, yet ere Conception to prevent
The Race unbleſt, to being yet unbegot.
Childleſs thou art, Childleſs remaine:
So Death ſhall be deceav'd his glut, and with us two
Be forc'd to ſatisfie his Rav'nous Maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Converſing, looking, loving, to abſtain
From Loves due Rites, Nuptial imbraces ſweet,
And with deſire to languiſh without hope,
Before the preſent object languiſhing
With like deſire, which would be meſerie
And torment leſs then none of what we dread,
Then both our ſelves and Seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make ſhort,
Let us ſeek Death, or he not found, ſupply
With our own hands his Office on our ſelves;
Why ſtand we longer ſhivering under feares,
That ſhew no end but Death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the ſhorteſt chooſing,
Deſtruction with deſtruction to deſtroy.

She ended heer, or vehement deſpaire
Broke off the reſt; ſo much of Death her thoughts
Had entertaind, as di'd her Checks with pale.
But *Adam* with ſuch counſel nothing ſway'd,
To better hopes his more attentive minde
Labouring had rais'd, and thus to *Eve* repli'd.

*Eve,* thy contempt of life and pleaſure ſeems
To argue in thee ſomthing more ſublime
And excellent then what thy minde contemnes;
But ſelf-deſtruction therefore ſaught, refutes
That excellence thought in thee, and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguiſh and regret
For loſs of life and pleaſure overlov'd.
Or if thou covet death, as utmoſt end
Of miſerie, ſo thinking to evade
The penaltie pronounc't, doubt not but God
Hath wiſelier arm'd his vengeful ire then ſo
To be foreſtall'd; much more I fear leaſt Death
So ſnatcht will not exempt us from the paine
We are by doom to pay; rather ſuch acts
Of contumacie will provoke the higheſt
To make death in us live: Then let us ſeek
Some ſafer reſolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to minde with heed
Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed ſhall bruiſe
The Serpents head; piteous amends, unleſs
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe
*Satan,* who in the Serpent hath contriv'd
Againſt us this deceit: to cruſh his head
Would be revenge indeed; which will be loſt
By death brought on our ſelves, or childleſs days
Reſolv'd, as thou propoſeſt; ſo our Foe
Shall ſcape his puniſhment ordain'd, and wee
Inſtead ſhall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mention'd then of violence
Againſt our ſelves, and wilful barrenneſs,
That cuts us off from hope, and ſavours onely
Rancor and pride, impatience and deſpite,
Reluctance againſt God and his juſt yoke
Laid on our Necks. Remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard and judg'd
Without wrauth or reviling; wee expected
Immediate diſſolution, which we thought
Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee
Pains onely in Child-bearing were foretold,
And bringing forth, ſoon recompenc't with joy,
Fruit of thy Womb: On mee the Curſe aſlope
Glanc'd on the ground, with labour I muſt earne
My bread; what harm? Idleneſs had bin worſe;
My labour will ſuſtain me; and leaſt Cold
Or Heat ſhould injure us, his timely care
Hath unbeſaught provided, and his hands
Cloath'd us unworthie, pitying while he judg'd;
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pitie incline,
And teach us further by what means to ſhun
Th' inclement Seaſons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow,
Which now the Skie with various Face begins
To ſhew us in this Mountain, while the Winds
Blow moiſt and keen, ſhattering the graceful locks
Of theſe fair ſpreading Trees; which bids us ſeek
Som better ſhroud, ſom better warmth to cheriſh
Our Limbs benumm'd, ere this diurnal Starr
Leave cold the Night, how we his gather'd beams
Reflected, may with matter ſere foment,
Or by colliſion of two bodies grinde
The Air attrite to Fire, as late the Clouds
Juſtling or puſht with Winds rude in thir ſhock
Tine the ſlant Lightning, whoſe thwart flame driv'n down
Kindles the gummie bark of Firr or Pine,
And ſends a comfortable heat from farr,
Which might ſupplie the Sun: ſuch Fire to uſe,
And what may elſe be remedie or cure
To evils which our own miſdeeds have wrought,
Hee will inſtruct us praying, and of Grace
Beſeeching him, ſo as we need not fear
To paſs commodiouſly this life, ſuſtain'd
By him with many comforts, till we end
In duſt, our final reſt and native home.
What better can we do, then to the place
Repairing where he judg'd us, proſtrate fall
Before him reverent, and there confeſs
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears
Watering the ground, and with our ſighs the Air
Frequenting, ſent from hearts contrite, in ſign
Of ſorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek.
Undoubtedly he will relent and turn
From his diſpleaſure; in whoſe look ſerene,
When angry moſt he ſeem'd and moſt ſevere,
What elſe but favor, grace, and mercie ſhon?

So ſpake our Father penitent, nor *Eve*
Felt leſs remorſe: they forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judg'd them proſtrate fell
Before him reverent, and both confeſs'd
Humbly thir faults, and pardon beg'd, with tears
Watering the ground, and with thir ſighs the Air
Frequenting, ſent from hearts contrite, in ſign
Of ſorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek.
