---
position: 11
label: "Book 11"
depth: 1
---
## BOOK XI.

## THE ARGUMENT.

The Son of God preſents to his Father the Prayers of our firſt Parents now repenting, and intercedes for them: God accepts them, but declares that they muſt no longer abide in Paradiſe; ſends *Michael* with a Band of Cherubim to diſpoſſeſs them; but firſt to reveal to *Adam* future things: *Michaels* coming down. *Adam* ſhews to *Eve* certain ominous ſigns; he diſcerns *Michaels* approach, goes out to meet him: the Angel denounces thir departure. *Eve's* Lamentation. *Adam* pleads, but ſubmits: The Angel leads him up to a high Hill, ſets before him in viſion what ſhall happ'n till the Flood.

THus they in lowlieſt plight repentant ſtood
Praying, for from the Mercie-ſeat above
Prevenient Grace deſcending had remov'd
The ſtonie from thir hearts, & made new fleſh
Regenerate grow inſtead, that ſigns now breath'd
Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer
Inſpir'd, and wing'd for Heav'n with ſpeedier flight
Then loudeſt Oratorie: yet thir port
Not of mean ſuitors, nor important leſs
Seem'd thir Petition, then when th' ancient Pair
In Fables old, leſs ancient yet then theſe,
*Deucalion* and chaſte *Pyrtha* to reſtore
The Race of Mankind drownd, before the Shrine
Of *Themis* ſtood devout. To Heav'n thir prayers
Flew up, nor miſsd the way, by envious windes
Blow'n vagabond or fruſtrate: in they paſsd
Dimentionleſs through Heav'nly dores; then clad
With incenſe, where the Golden Altar fum'd,
By thir great Interceſſor, came in ſight
Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son
Preſenting, thus to intercede began.

See Father, what firſt fruits on Earth are ſprung
From thy implanted Grace in Man, theſe Sighs
And Prayers, which in this Golden Cenſer, mixt
With Incenſe, I thy Prieſt before thee bring,
Fruits of more pleaſing favour from thy ſeed
Sow'n with contrition in his heart, then thoſe
Which his own hand manuring all the Trees
Of Paradiſe could have produc't, ere fall'n
From innocence. Now therefore bend thine eare
To ſupplication, heare his ſighs though mute;
Unskilful with what words to pray, let mee
Interpret for him, mee his Advocate
And propitiation, all his works on mee
Good or not good ingraft, my Merit thoſe
Shall perfet, and for theſe my Death ſhall pay.
Accept me, and in mee from theſe receave
The ſmell of peace toward Mankinde, let him live
Before thee reconcil'd, at leaſt his days
Numberd, though ſad, till Death, his doom (which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverſe)
To better life ſhall yeeld him, where with mee
All my redeemd may dwell in joy and bliſs,
Made one with me as I with thee am one.

To whom the Father, without Cloud, ſerene.
All thy requeſt for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain, all thy requeſt was my Decree:
But longer in that Paradiſe to dwell,
The Law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Thoſe pure immortal Elements that know
No groſs, no unharmoneous mixture foule,
Eject him tainted now, and purge him off
As a diſtemper, groſs to aire as groſs,
And mortal food, as may diſpoſe him beſt
For diſſolution wrought by Sin, that firſt
Diſtemperd all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted. I at firſt with two fair gifts
Created him endowd, with Happineſs
And Immortalitie: that fondly loſt,
This other ſerv'd but to eternize woe;
Till I provided Death; ſo Death becomes
His final remedie, and after Life
Tri'd in ſharp tribulation, and refin'd
By Faith and faithful works, to ſecond Life,
Wak't in the renovation of the juſt,
Reſignes him up with Heav'n and Earth renewd.
But let us call to Synod all the Bleſt
Through Heav'ns wide bounds; from them I will not hide
My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant Angels late they ſaw;
And in thir ſtate, though firm, ſtood more confirmd.

He ended, and the Son gave ſignal high
To the bright Miniſter that watchd, hee blew
His Trumpet, heard in *Oreb* ſince perhaps
When God deſcended, and perhaps once more
To ſound at general Doom. Th' Angelic blaſt
Filld all the Regions: from thir bliſsful Bowrs
Of *Amarantin* Shade, Fountain or Spring,
By the waters of Life, where ere they ſate
In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light
Haſted, reſorting to the Summons high,
And took thir Seats; till from his Throne ſupream
Th' Almighty thus pronouncd his ſovran Will.

O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both Good and Evil, ſince his taſte
Of that defended Fruit; but let him boaſt
His knowledge of Good loſt, and Evil got,
Happier, had it ſuffic'd him to have known
Good by it ſelf, and Evil not at all.
He ſorrows now, repents, and prayes contrite,
My motions in him, longer then they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain
Self-left. Leaſt therefore his now bolder hand
Reach alſo of the Tree of Life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at leaſt to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And ſend him from the Garden forth to Till
The Ground whence he was taken, fitter ſoile.

*Michael,* this my beheſt have thou in charge,
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming Warriours, leaſt the Fiend
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant poſſeſſion ſom new trouble raiſe:
Haſt thee, and from the Paradiſe of God
Without remorſe drive out the ſinful Pair,
From hallowd ground th' unholie, and denounce
To them and to thir Progenie from thence
Perpetual baniſhment. Yet leaſt they faint
At the ſad Sentence rigorouſly urg'd,
For I behold them ſoftn'd and with tears
Bewailing thir exceſs, all terror hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Diſmiſs them not diſconſolate; reveale
To *Adam* what ſhall come in future dayes,
As I ſhall thee enlighten, intermix
My Cov'nant in the womans ſeed renewd;
So ſend them forth, though ſorrowing, yet in peace▪
And on the Eaſt ſide of the Garden place,
Where entrance up from *Eden* eaſieſt climbes,
Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame
Wide waving, all approach farr off to fright,
And guard all paſſage to the Tree of Life:
Leaſt Paradiſe a receptacle prove
To Spirits foule, and all my Trees thir prey,
With whoſe ſtol'n Fruit Man once more to delude.

He ceas'd; and th' Archangelic Power prepar'd
For ſwift deſcent, with him the Cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each
Had, like a double *Janus,* all thir ſhape
Spangl'd with eyes more numerous then thoſe
Of *Argus,* and more wakeful then to drouze,
Charm'd with *Arcadian* Pipe, the Paſtoral Reed
Of *Hermes,* or his opiate Rod. Mean while
To reſalute the World with ſacred Light
*Leucothea* wak'd, and with freſh dews imbalmd
The Earth, when *Adam* and firſt Matron *Eve*
Had ended now thir Oriſons, and found
Strength added from above, new hope to ſpring
Out of deſpaire, joy, but with fear yet linkt;
Which thus to *Eve* his welcome words renewd.

*Eve,* eaſily may Faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy, from Heav'n deſcends;
But that from us ought ſhould aſcend to Heav'n
So prevalent as to concerne the mind
Of God high-bleſt, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may ſeem; yet this will Prayer,
Or one ſhort ſigh of humane breath, up-borne
Ev'n to the Seat of God. For ſince I ſaught
By Prayer th' offended Deitie to appeaſe,
Kneel'd and before him humbl'd all my heart,
Methought I ſaw him placable and mild,
Bending his eare; perſwaſion in me grew
That I was heard with favour; peace returnd
Home to my Breſt, and to my memorie
His promiſe, that thy Seed ſhall bruiſe our Foe;
Which then not minded in diſmay, yet now
Aſſures me that the bitterneſs of death
Is paſt, and we ſhall live. Whence Haile to thee,
*Eve* rightly call'd, Mother of all Mankind,
Mother of all things living, ſince by thee
Man is to live, and all things live for Man.

To whom thus *Eve* with ſad demeanour meek.
Ill worthie I ſuch title ſhould belong
To me tranſgreſſour, who for thee ordaind
A help, became thy ſnare; to mee reproach
Rather belongs, diſtruſt and all diſpraiſe:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I who firſt brought Death on all, am grac't
The ſourſe of life; next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me voutſaf'ſt,
Farr other name deſerving. But the Field
To labour calls us now with ſweat impos'd,
Though after ſleepleſs Night; for ſee the Morn,
All unconcern'd with our unreſt, begins
Her roſie progreſs ſmiling; let us forth,
I never from thy ſide henceforth to ſtray,
Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoind
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,
What can be toilſom in theſe pleaſant Walkes?
Here let us live, though in fall'n ſtate, content.

So ſpake, ſo wiſh'd much-humbl•d *Eve,* but Fate
Subſcrib'd not; Nature firſt gave Signs, impreſt
On Bird, Beaſt, Aire, Aire ſuddenly eclips'd
After ſhort bluſh of Morn; nigh in her ſight
The Bird of *Jove,* ſtoopt from his aerie tour,
Two Birds of gayeſt plume before him drove:
Down from a Hill the Beaſt that reigns in Woods,
Firſt hunter then, purſu'd a gentle brace,
Goodlieſt of all the Forreſt, Hart and Hinde;
Direct to th' Eaſtern Gate was bent thir flight.
*Adam* obſerv'd, and with his Eye the chaſe
Purſuing, not unmov'd to *Eve* thus ſpake.

O *Eve,* ſome furder change awaits us nigh,
Which Heav'n by theſe mute ſigns in Nature ſhews
Forerunners of his purpoſe, or to warn
Us haply too ſecure of our diſcharge
From penaltie, becauſe from death releaſt
Some days; how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows, or more then this, that we are duſt,
And thither muſt return and be no more.
Why elſe this double object in our ſight
Of flight purſu'd in th' Air and ore the ground
One way the ſelf-ſame hour? why in the Eaſt
Darkneſs ere Dayes mid courſe, and Morning light
More orient in yon Weſtern Cloud that draws
O're the blew Firmament a radiant white,
And ſlow deſcends, with ſomthing heav'nly fraught.

He err'd not, for by this the heav'nly Bands
Down from a Skie of Jaſper lighted now
In Paradiſe, and on a Hill made alt,
A glorious Apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimm'd *Adams* eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met
*Jacob* in *Mahanaim,* where he ſaw
The field Pavilion'd with his Guardians bright;
Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeerd
In *Dothan,* cover'd with a Camp of Fire,
Againſt the *Syrian* King, who to ſurprize
One man, Aſſaſſin-like had levied Warr,
Warr unproclam'd. The Princely Hierarch
In thir bright ſtand, there left his Powers to ſeiſe
Poſſeſſion of the Garden; hee alone,
To find where *Adam* ſhelterd, took his way,
Not unperceav'd of *Adam,* who to *Eve,*
While the great Viſitant approachd, thus ſpake.

*Eve,* now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will ſoon determin, or impoſe
New Laws to be obſerv'd; for I deſcrie
From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill
One of the heav'nly Hoſt, and by his Gate
None of the meaneſt, ſome great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above, ſuch Majeſtie
Inveſts him coming? yet not terrible,
That I ſhould fear, nor ſociably mild,
As *Raphael,* that I ſhould much confide,
But ſolemn and ſublime, whom not to offend,
With reverence I muſt meet, and thou retire.
He ended; and th' Arch-Angel ſoon drew nigh,
Not in his ſhape Celeſtial, but as Man
Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Armes
A militarie Veſt of purple flowd
Livelier then *Meliboean,* or the graine
Of *Sarra,* worn by Kings and Hero's old
In time of Truce; *Iris* had dipt the wooff;
His ſtarrie Helme unbuckl'd ſhew'd him prime
In Manhood where Youth ended; by his ſide
As in a gliſtering *Zodiac* hung the Sword,
Satans dire dread, and in his hand the Spear.
*Adam* bowd low, hee Kingly from his State
Inclin'd not, but his coming thus declar'd.

*Adam,* Heav'ns high beheſt no Preface needs:
Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death,
Then due by ſentence when thou didſt tranſgreſs,
Defeated of his ſeiſure many dayes
Giv'n thee of Grace, wherein thou may'ſt repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
Mayſt cover: well may then thy Lord appeas'd
Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claime;
But longer in this Paradiſe to dwell
Permits not; to remove thee I am come,
And ſend thee from the Garden forth to till
The ground whence thou waſt tak'n, fitter Soile.

He added not, for *Adam* at the newes
Heart-ſtrook with chilling gripe of ſorrow ſtood,
That all his ſenſes bound; *Eve,* who unſeen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Diſcover'd ſoon the place of her retire.

O unexpected ſtroke, worſe then of Death!
Muſt I thus leave thee Paradiſe? thus leave
Thee Native Soile, theſe happie Walks and Shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to ſpend,
Quiet though ſad, the reſpit of that day
That muſt be mortal to us both. O flours,
That never will in other Climate grow,
My early viſitation, and my laſt
At Eev'n, which I bred up with tender hand
From the firſt op'ning bud, and gave ye Names,
Who now ſhall reare ye to the Sun, or ranke
Your Tribes, and water from th' ambroſial Fount?
Thee laſtly nuptial Bowre, by mee adornd
With what to ſight or ſmell was ſweet; from thee
How ſhall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower World, to this obſcure
And wilde, how ſhall we breath in other Aire
Leſs pure, accuſtomd to immortal Fruits?

Whom thus the Angel interrupted milde.
Lament not *Eve,* but patiently reſigne
What juſtly thou haſt loſt; nor ſet thy heart,
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine;
Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes
Thy Husband, him to follow thou art bound;
Where he abides, think there thy native ſoile.

*Adam* by this from the cold ſudden damp
Recovering, and his ſcatterd ſpirits returnd.
To *Michael* thus his humble words addreſsd.

Celeſtial, whether among the Thrones, or nam'd
Of them the Higheſt, for ſuch of ſhape may ſeem
Prince above Princes, gently haſt thou tould
Thy meſſage, which might elſe in telling wound,
And in performing end us; what beſides
Of ſorrow and dejection and deſpair
Our frailtie can ſuſtain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our ſweet
Receſs, and onely conſolation left
Familiar to our eyes, all places elſe
Inhoſpitable appeer and deſolate,
Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer
Inceſſant I could hope to change the will
Of him who all things can, I would not ceaſe
To wearie him with my aſſiduous cries:
But prayer againſt his abſolute Decree
No more availes then breath againſt the winde,
Blown ſtifling back on him that breaths it forth:
Therefore to his great bidding I ſubmit.
This moſt afflicts me, that departing hence,
As from his face I ſhall be hid, deprivd
His bleſſed count'nance; here I could frequent,
With worſhip, place by place where he voutſaf 'd
Preſence Divine, and to my Sons relate;
On this Mount he appeerd, under this Tree
Stood viſible, among theſe Pines his voice
I heard, here with him at this Fountain talk'd:
So many grateful Altars I would reare
Of graſſie Terfe, and pile up every Stone
Of luſtre from the brook, in memorie,
Or monument to Ages, and thereon
Offer ſweet ſmelling Gumms and Fruits and Flours:
In yonder nether World where ſhall I ſeek
His bright appearances, or foot ſtep-trace?
For though I fled him angrie, yet recall'd
To life prolongd and promisd Race, I now
Gladly behold though but his utmoſt skirts
Of glory, and farr off his ſteps adore.

To whom thus *Michael* with regard benigne.
*Adam,* thou know'ſt Heav'n his, and all the Earth.
Not this Rock onely; his Omnipreſence fills
Land, Sea, and Aire, and every kinde that lives,
Fomented by his virtual power and warmd:
All th' Earth he gave thee to poſſeſs and rule,
No deſpicable gift; ſurmiſe not then
His preſence to theſe narrow bounds confin'd
Of Paradiſe or *Eden:* this had been
Perhaps thy Capital Seare, from whence had ſpred
All generations, and had hither come
From all the ends of th' Earth, to celebrate
And reverence thee thir great Progenitor.
But this praeeminence thou haſt loſt, brought down
To dwell on eeven ground now with thy Sons:
Yet doubt not but in Vallie and in plaine
God is as here, and will be found alike
Preſent, and of his preſence many a ſigne
Still following thee, ſtill compaſſing thee round
With goodneſs and paternal Love, his Face
Expreſs, and of his ſteps the track Divine.
Which that thou mayſt beleeve, and be confirmd
Ere thou from hence depart, know I am ſent
To ſhew thee what ſhall come in future dayes
To thee and to thy Ofspring; good with bad
Expect to hear, ſupernal Grace contending
With ſinfulneſs of Men; thereby to learn
True patience, and to temper joy with fear
And pious ſorrow, equally enur'd
By moderation either ſtate to beare,
Proſperous or adverſe: ſo ſhalt thou lead
Safeſt thy life, and beſt prepar'd endure
Thy mortal paſſage when it comes. Aſcend
This Hill; let *Eve* (for I have drencht her eyes)
Here ſleep below while thou to foreſight wak'ſt,
As once thou ſlepſt, while Shee to life was formd.

To whom thus *Adam* gratefully repli'd.
Aſcend, I follow thee, ſafe Guide, the path
Thou lead'ſt me, and to the hand of Heav'n ſubmit,
However chaſt'ning, to the evil turne
My obvious breaſt, arming to overcom
By ſuffering, and earne reſt from labour won,
If ſo I may attain. So both aſcend
In the Viſions of God: It was a Hill
Of Paradiſe the higheſt, from whoſe top
The Hemiſphere of Earth in cleereſt Ken
Stretcht out to the ampleſt reach of proſpect lay.
Not higher that Hill nor wider looking round,
Whereon for different cauſe the Tempter ſet
Our ſecond *Adam* in the Wilderneſs,
To ſhew him all Earths Kingdomes and thir Glory.
His Eye might there command wherever ſtood
City of old or modern Fame, the Seat
Of mightieſt Empire, from the deſtind Walls
Of *Cambalu,* ſeat of *Cathaian Can*
And *Samarchand* by *Oxus, Temirs* Throne,
To *Paquin* of *Sinaean* Kings, and thence
To *Agra* and *Lahor* of great *Mogul*
Down to the golden *Cherſoneſe,* or where
The *Perſian* in *Ecbatan* ſate, or ſince
In *Hispahan,* or where the *Ruſſian Kfar*
In *Moſco,* or the Sultan in *Bizance,*
*Turcheſtan*-born; nor could his eye not ken
Th' Empire of *Negus* to his utmoſt Port
*Ercoco* and the leſs *Maritim* Kings
*Mombaza,* and *Quiloa,* and *Melind,*
And *Sofala* thought *Ophir,* to the Realme
Of *Congo,* and *Angola* fardeſt South;
Or thence from *Niger* Flood to *Atlas* Mount
The Kingdoms of *Almanſor, Fez* and *Sus,*
*Marocco* and *Algiers,* and *Tremiſen;*
On *Europe* thence, and where *Rome* was to ſway
The World: in Spirit perhaps he alſo ſaw
Rich *Mexico* the ſeat of *Motezume,*
And *Cuſco* in *Peru,* the richer ſeat
Of *Atabalipa,* and yet unſpoil'd
*Guiana,* whoſe great Citie *Geryons* Sons
Call *El Dorado:* but to nobler ſights
*Michael* from *Adams* eyes the Filme remov'd
Which that falſe Fruit that promis'd clearer ſight
Had bred; then purg'd with Euphraſie and Rue
The viſual Nerve, for he had much to ſee;
And from the Well of Life three drops inſtill'd.
So deep the power of theſe Ingredients pierc'd,
Eevn to the inmoſt ſeat of mental ſight,
That *Adam* now enforc't to cloſe his eyes,
Sunk down and all his Spirits became intranſt:
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon rais'd, and his attention thus recall'd.

*Adam,* now ope thine eyes, and firſt behold
Th' effects which thy original crime hath wrought
In ſome to ſpring from thee, who never touch'd
Th' excepted Tree, nor with the Snake conſpir'd,
Nor ſinn'd thy ſin, yet from that derive
Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds.

His eyes he op'nd, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were Sheaves
New reapt, the other part ſheep-walks and foulds;
Ith' midſt an Altar as the Land-mark ſtood
Ruſtic, of graſſie ſord; thither anon
A ſweatie Reaper from his Tillage brought
Firſt Fruits, the green Eare, and the yellow Sheaf,
Uncull'd, as came to hand; a Shepherd next
More meek came with the Firſtlings of his Flock
Choiceſt and beſt; then ſacrificing, laid
The Inwards and thir Fat, with Incenſe ſtrew'd,
On the cleft Wood, and all due Rites perform'd.
His Offring ſoon propitious Fire from Heav'n
Conſum'd with nimble glance, and grateful ſteame;
The others not, for his was not ſincere;
Whereat hee inlie rag'd, and as they talk'd,
Smote him into the Midriff with a ſtone
That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale
Groand out his Soul with guſhing bloud effus'd.
Much at that ſight was *Adam* in his heart
Diſmai'd, and thus in haſte to th' Angel cri'd.

O Teacher, ſome great miſchief hath befall'n
To that meek man, who well had ſacrific'd;
Is Pietie thus and pure Devotion paid?

T' whom *Michael* thus, hee alſo mov'd, repli'd.
Theſe two are Brethren, *Adam,* and to come
Out of thy loyns; th' unjuſt the juſt hath ſlain,
For envie that his Brothers Offering found
From Heav'n acceptance; but the bloodie Fact
Will be aveng'd, and th' others Faith approv'd
Looſe no reward, though here thou ſee him die,
Rowling in duſt and gore. To which our Sire.

Alas, both for the deed and for the cauſe!
But have I now ſeen Death? Is this the way
I muſt return to native duſt? O ſight
Of terrour, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!

To whom thus *Michael.* Death thou haſt ſeen
In his firſt ſhape on man; but many ſhapes
Of Death, and many are the wayes that lead
To his grim Cave, all diſmal; yet to ſenſe
More terrible at th' entrance then within.
Some, as thou ſaw'ſt, by violent ſtroke ſhall die,
By Fire, Flood, Famin, by Intemperance more
In Meats and Drinks which on the Earth ſhall bring
Diſeaſes dire, of which a monſtrous crew
Before thee ſhall appear; that thou mayſt know
What miſerie th' inabſtinence of *Eve*
Shall bring on men. Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeard, ſad, noyſom, dark,
A Lazar-houſe it ſeemd, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diſeas'd, all maladies
Of gaſtly Spaſm, or racking torture, qualmes
Of heart-ſick Agonic, all feavorous kinds,
Convulſions, Epilepſies, fierce Catarrhs,
Inteſtin Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs,
Daemoniac Phrenzie, moaping Melancholie
And Moon-ſtruck madneſs, pining Atrophie,
Maraſmus, and wide-waſting Peſtilence,
Dropſies, and Aſthma's, and Joint-racking Rheums.
Dire was the toſſing, deep the groans, deſpair
Tended the ſick buſieſt from Couch to Couch;
And over them triumphant Death his Dart
Shook, but delaid to ſtrike, though oft invok't
With vows, as thir chief good, and final hope.
Sight ſo deform what heart of Rock could long
Drie-ey'd behold? *Adam* could not, but wept,
Though not of Woman born; compaſſion quell'd
His beſt of Man, and gave him up to tears
A ſpace, till firmer thoughts reſtraind exceſs,
And ſcarce recovering words his plaint renew'd,

O miſerable Mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched ſtate reſerv'd!
Better end heer unborn. Why is life giv'n
To be thus wreſted from us? rather why
Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew
What we receive, would either not accept
Life offer'd, or ſoon beg to lay it down,
Glad to be ſo diſmiſt in peace. Can thus
Th' Image of God in man created once
So goodly and erect, though faultie ſince,
To ſuch unſightly ſufferings be debas't
Under inhuman pains? Why ſhould not Man,
Retaining ſtill Divine ſimilitude
In part, from ſuch deformities be free,
And for his Makers Image ſake exempt?
Thir Makers Image, anſwerd *Michael* then
Forſook them, when themſelves they villifi'd
To ſerve ungovern'd appetite, and took
His Image whom they ſerv'd, a brutiſh vice,
Inductive mainly to the ſin of *Eve.*
Therefore ſo abject is thir puniſhment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeneſs, but thir own,
Or if his likeneſs, by themſelves defac't
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathſom ſickneſs, worthily, ſince they
Gods Image did not reverence in themſelves.

I yield it juſt, ſaid *Adam,* and ſubmit.
But is there yet no other way, beſides
Theſe painful paſſages, how we may come
To Death, and mix with our connatural duſt?

There is, ſaid *Michael,* if thou well obſerve
The rule of not too much, by temperance taught
In what thou eatſt and drinkſt, ſeeking from thence
Due nouriſhment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So maiſt thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop
Into thy Mothers lap, or be with eaſe
Gatherd, not harſhly pluckt, for death mature:
This is old age; but then thou muſt outlive
Thy youth, thy ſtrength, thy beauty, which will change
To witherd weak and gray; thy Senſes then
Obtuſe, all taſte of pleaſure muſt forgoe,
To what thou haſt, and for the Aire of youth
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reigne
A melancholly damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy Spirits down, and laſt conſume
The Balme of Life. To whom our Anceſtor.

Henceforth I flie not Death, nor would prolong
Life much, bent rather how I may be quit
Faireſt and eaſieſt of this combrous charge,
Which I muſt keep till my appointed day
Of rendring up, and patiently attend
My diſſolution. *Michael* repli'd,

Nor love thy Life, nor hate; but what thou livſt
Live well, how long or ſhort permit to Heav'n:
And now prepare thee for another ſight.

He lookd and faw a ſpacious Plaine, whereon
Were Tents of various hue; by ſome were herds
Of Cattel grazing: others, whence the ſound
Of Inſtruments that made melodious chime
Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moovd
Thir ſtops and chords was ſeen: his volant touch
Inſtinct through all proportions low and high
Fled and purſu'd tranſverſe the reſonant fugue.
In other part ſtood one who at the Forge
Labouring, two maſſie clods of Iron and Braſs
Had melted (whether found where caſual fire
Had waſted woods on Mountain or in Vale,
Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot
To ſom Caves mouth, or whether waſht by ſtream
From underground) the liquid Ore he dreind
Into fit moulds prepar'd; from which he formd
Firſt his own Tooles; then, what might elſe be wrought
Fuſil or grav'n in mettle. After theſe,
But on the hether ſide a different ſort
From the high neighbouring Hills, which was thir Seat,
Down to the Plain deſcended: by thir guiſe
Juſt men they ſeemd, and all thir ſtudy bent
To worſhip God aright, and know his works
Not hid, nor thoſe things laſt which might preſerve
Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain
Long had not walkt, when from the Tents behold
A Beavie of fair Women, richly gay
In Gems and wanton dreſs; to the Harp they ſung
Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on:
The Men though grave, ey'd them, and let thir eyes
Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net
Faſt caught, they lik'd, and each his liking choſe;
And now of love they treat till th' Eevning Star
Loves Harbinger appeerd; then all in heat
They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke
*Hymen,* then firſt to marriage Rites invok't;
With Feaſt and Muſick all the Tents reſound.
Such happy interview and fair event
Of love and youth not loſt, Songs, Garlands, Flours,
And charming Symphonies attach'd the heart
Of *Adam,* ſoon enclin'd to admit delight,
The bent of Nature; which he thus expreſs'd.

True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel bleſt,
Much better ſeems this Viſion, and more hope
Of peaceful dayes portends, then thoſe two paſt;
Thoſe were of hate and death, or pain much worſe,
Here Nature ſeems fulfilld in all her ends.

To whom thus *Michael.* Judg not what is beſt
By pleaſure, though to Nature ſeeming meet,
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holie and pure, conformitie divine.
Thoſe Tents thou ſawſt ſo pleaſant, were the Tents
Of wickedneſs, wherein ſhall dwell his Race
Who ſlew his Brother; ſtudious they appere
Of Arts that poliſh Life, Inventers rare,
Unmindful of thir Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledg'd none.
Yet they abeauteous ofspring ſhall beget;
For that fair femal Troop thou ſawſt, that ſeemd
Of Goddeſſes, ſo blithe, ſo ſmooth, ſo gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein conſiſts
Womans domeſtic honour and chief praiſe;
Bred onely and completed to the taſte
Of luſtful appetence, to ſing, to dance,
To dreſs, and troule the Tongue, and roule the Eye.
To theſe that ſober Race of Men, whoſe lives
Religious titl'd them the Sons of God,
Shall yield up all thir vertue, all thir fame
Ignobly, to the traines and to the ſmiles
Of theſe fair Atheiſts, and now ſwim in joy,
(Erelong to ſwim at large) and laugh; for which
The world erelong a world of tears muſt weepe.

To whom thus *Adam* of ſhort joy bereft.
O pittie and ſhame, that they who to live well
Enterd ſo faire, ſhould turn aſide to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But ſtill I ſee the tenor of Mans woe
Holds on the ſame, from Woman to begin.

From Mans effeminate ſlackneſs it begins,
Said th' Angel, who ſhould better hold his place
By wiſdome, and ſuperiour gifts receav'd.
But now prepare thee for another Scene.

He lookd and ſaw wide Territorie ſpred
Before him, Towns, and rural works between,
Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towrs,
Concourſ in Arms, fierce Faces threatning Warr,
Giants of mightie Bone, and bould empriſe;
Part wield thir Arms, part courb the foaming Steed,
Single or in Array of Battel rang'd
Both Horſe and Foot, nor idely muſtring ſtood;
One way a Band ſelect from forage drives
A herd of Beeves, faire Oxen and faire Kine
From a ſat Meddow ground; or fleecy Flock,
Ewes and thir bleating Lambs over the Plaine,
Thir Bootie; ſcarce with Life the Shepherds flye,
But callin aide, which makes a bloody Fray;
With cruel Tournament the Squadrons joine;
Where Cattle paſtur'd late, now ſcatterd lies
With Carcaſſes and Arms th' enſanguind Field
Deſerted: Others to a Citie ſtrong
Lay Seige, encampt; by Batterie, Scale, and Mine,
Aſſaulting; others from the wall defend
With Dart and Jav'lin, Stones and ſulfurous Fire;
On each hand ſlaughter and gigantic deeds.
In other part the ſcepter'd Haralds call
To Council in the Citie Gates: anon
Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriours mixt,
Aſſemble, and Harangues are heard, but ſoon
In factious oppoſition, till at laſt
Of middle Age one riſing, eminent
In wiſe deport, ſpake much of Right and Wrong,
Of Juſtice, of Religion, Truth and Peace,
And Judgment from above: him old and young
Exploded and had ſeiz'd with violent hands,
Had not a Cloud deſcending ſnatch'd him thence
Unſeen amid the throng: ſo violence
Proceeded, and Oppreſſion, and Sword-Law
Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found.
*Adam* was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turnd full ſad; O what are theſe,
Deaths Miniſters, not Men, who thus deal Death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thouſand fould the ſin of him who ſlew
His Brother; for of whom ſuch maſſacher
Make they but of thir Brethren, men of men?
But who was that Juſt Man, whom had not Heav'n
Reſcu'd, had in his Righteouſneſs bin loſt?

To whom thus *Michael.* Theſe are the product
Of thoſe ill mated Marriages thou ſaw'ſt:
Where good with bad were matcht, who of themſelves
Abhor to joyn; and by imprudence mixt,
Produce prodigious Births of bodie or mind.
Such were theſe Giants, men of high renown;
For in thoſe dayes Might onely ſhall be admir'd,
And Valour and Heroic Vertu call'd;
To overcome in Battle, and ſubdue
Nations, and bring home ſpoils with infinite
Man-ſlaughter, ſhall be held the higheſt pitch
Of human Glorie, and for Glorie done
Of triumph, to be ſtyl'd great Conquerours,
Patrons of Mankind, Gods, and Sons of Gods,
Deſtroyers rightlier call'd and Plagues of men.
Thus Fame ſhall be atchiev'd, renown on Earth,
And what moſt merits fame in ſilence hid.
But hee the ſeventh from thee, whom thou beheldſt
The onely righteous in a World perverſe,
And therefore hared, therefore ſo beſet
With Foes for daring ſingle to be juſt,
And utter odious Truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints: Him the moſt High
Rapt in a balmie Cloud with winged Steeds
Did, as thou ſawſt, receave, to walk with God
High in Salvation and the Climes of bliſs,
Exempt from Death; to ſhew thee what reward
Awaits the good, the reſt what puniſhment?
Which now direct thine eyes and ſoon behold.

He look'd, and ſaw the face of things quite chang'd,
The brazen Throat of Warr had ceaſt to roar,
All now was turn'd to jollitie and game,
To luxurie and riot, feaſt and dance,
Marrying or proſtituting, as befell,
Rape or Adulterie, where paſſing faire
Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broiles.
At length a Reverend Sire among them came,
And of thir doings great diſlike declar'd,
And teſtifi'd againſt thir wayes; hee oft
Frequented thir Aſſemblies, where ſo met,
Triumphs or Feſtivals, and to them preachd
Converſion and Repentance, as to Souls.
In Priſon under Judgements imminent:
But all in vain: which when he ſaw, he ceas'd
Contending, and remov'd his Tents farr off;
Then from the Mountain hewing Timber tall,
Began to build a Veſſel of huge bulk,
Meaſur'd by Cubit, length, and breadth, and highth,
Smeard round with Pitch, and in the ſide a dore
Contriv'd, and of proviſions laid in large
For Man and Beaſt: when loe a wonder ſtrange I
Of every Beaſt, and Bird, and Inſect ſmall
Came ſeavens, and pairs, and enterd in, as taught
Thir order: laſt the Sire, and his three Sons
With thir four Wives; and God made faſt the dore.
Meanwhile the Southwind roſe, and with black wings
Wide hovering, all the Clouds together drove
From under Heav'n; the Hills to their ſupplie
Vapour, and Exhalation dusk and moiſt,
Sent up amain; and now the thick'nd Skie
Like a dark Ceeling ſtood; down ruſh'd the Rain
Impetuous, and continu'd till the Earth
No more was ſeen; the floating Veſſel ſwum
Uplifted; and ſecure with beaked prow
Rode tilting o're the Waves, all dwellings elſe
Flood overwhelmd, and them with all thir pomp
Deep under water rould; Sea cover'd Sea,
Sea without ſhoar; and in thir Palaces
Where luxurie late reign'd, Sea-monſters whelp'd
And ſtabl'd; of Mankind, ſo numerous late,
All left, in one ſmall bottom ſwum imbark't.
How didſt thou grieve then, *Adam,* to behold
The end of all thy Ofspring, end ſo ſad,
Depopulation; thee another Floud,
Of tears and ſorrow a Floud thee alſo drown'd,
And ſunk thee as thy Sons; till gently reard
By th' Angel, on thy feet thou ſtoodſt at laſt,
Though comfortleſs, as when a Father mourns
His Children, all in view deſtroyd at once;
And ſcarce to th' Angel utterdſt thus thy plaint.

O Viſions ill foreſeen! better had I
Liv'd ignorant of future, ſo had borne
My part of evil onely, each dayes lot
Anough to beare; thoſe now, that were diſpenſt
The burd'n of many Ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth
Abortive, to torment me ere thir being,
With thought that they muſt be. Let no man ſeek
Henceforth to be foretold what ſhall befall
Him or his Childern, evil he may be ſure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent,
And hee the future evil ſhall no leſs
In apprehenſion then in ſubſtance feel
Grievous to bear: but that care now is paſt,
Man is not whom to warne: thoſe few eſcap't
Famin and anguiſh will at laſt conſume
Wandring that watrie Deſert: I had hope
When violence was ceas't, and Warr on Earth,
All would have then gon well, peace would have crownd
With length of happy dayes the race of man;
But I was farr deceav'd; for now I ſee
Peace to corrupt no leſs then Warr to waſte.
How comes it thus? unfould, Celeſtial Guide,
And whether here the Race of man will end.
To whom thus *Michael.* Thoſe whom laſt thou ſawſt
In Triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
Firſt ſeen in acts of proweſs eminent
And great exploits, but of true vertu void;
Who having ſpilt much blood, and don much waſte
Subduing Nations, and achievd thereby
Fame in the World, high titles, and rich prey,
Shall change thir courſe to pleaſure, eaſe, and ſloth,
Surfet, and luſt, till wantonneſs and pride
Raiſe out of friendſhip hoſtil deeds in Peace.
The conquerd alſo, and enſlav'd by Warr
Shall with thir freedom loſt all vertu looſe
And fear of God, from whom thir pietie feign'd
In ſharp conteſt of Battel found no aide
Againſt invaders; therefore coold in zeale
Thenceforth ſhall practice how to live ſecure,
Worldlie or diſſolute, on what thir Lords
Shall leave them to enjoy; for th' Earth ſhall bear
More then anough, that temperance may be tri'd:
So all ſhall turn degenerate, all deprav'd,
Juſtice and Temperance, Truth and Faith forgot;
One Man except, the onely Son of light
In a dark Age, againſt example good,
Againſt allurement, cuſtom, and a World
Offended; fearleſs of reproach and ſcorn,
Or violence, hee of thir wicked wayes
Shall them admoniſh, and before them ſet
The paths of righteouſneſs, how much more ſafe,
And full of peace, denouncing wrauth to come
On thir impenitence; and ſhall returne
Of them derided, but of God obſervd
The one juſt Man alive; by his command
Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou beheldſt,
To ſave himſelf and houſhold from amidſt
A World devote to univerſal rack.
No ſooner hee with them of Man and Beaſt
Select for life ſhall in the Ark be lodg'd,
And ſhelterd round, but all the Cataracts
Of Heav'n ſet open on the Earth ſhall powre
Raine day and night, all fountains of the Deep
Broke up, ſhall heave the Ocean to uſurp
Beyond all bounds, till inundation riſe
Above the higheſt Hills: then ſhall this Mount
Of Paradiſe by might of Waves be moovd
Out of his place, puſhd by the horned floud,
With all his verdure ſpoil'd, and Trees adrift
Down the great River to the op'ning Gulf,
And there take root an Iland ſalt and bare,
The haunt of Seales and Orcs, and Sea-mews clang.
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No ſanctitie, if none be thither brought
By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now what further ſhall enſue, behold.

He lookd, and ſaw the Ark hull on the floud,
Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled,
Drivn by a keen North-winde, that blowing drie
Wrinkl'd the face of Deluge, as decai'd;
And the deer Sun on his wide watrie Glaſs
Gaz'd hot, and of the freſh Wave largely drew,
As after thirſt, which made thir flowing ſhrink
From ſtanding lake to tripping ebbe, that ſtole
With ſoft foot towards the deep, who now had ſtopt
His Sluces, as the Heav'n his windows ſhut.
The Ark no more now flotes, but ſeems on ground
Faſt on the top of ſom high mountain fixt.
And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appeer;
With clamor thence the rapid Currents drive
Towards the retreating Sea thir furious tyde.
Forthwith from out the Arke a Raven flies,
And after him, the furer meſſenger,
A Dove ſent forth once and agen to ſpie
Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light;
The ſecond time returning, in his Bill
An Olive leafe he brings, pacific ſigne:
Anon drie ground appeers, and from his Arke
The ancient Sire deſcends with all his Train;
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heav'n, over his head beholds
A dewie Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow
Conſpicuous with three liſted colours gay,
Betok'ning peace from God, and Cov'nant new.
Whereat the heart of *Adam* erſt ſo ſad
Greatly rejoyc'd, and thus his joy broke forth.

O thou who future things canſt repreſent
As preſent, Heav'nly inſtructer, I revive
At this laſt ſight, aſſur'd that Man ſhall live
With all the Creatures, and thir ſeed preſerve.
Farr leſs I now lament for one whole World
Of wicked Sons deſtroyd, then I rejoyce
For one Man found ſo perfet and ſo juſt,
That God voutſafes to raiſe another World
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But ſay, what mean thoſe colourd ſtreaks in Heavn,
Diſtended as the Brow of God appeas'd,
Or ſerve they as a flourie verge to binde
The fluid skirts of that ſame watrie Cloud.
Leaſt it again diſſolve and ſhowr the Earth?

To whom th' Archangel. Dextrouſly thou aim'ſt;
So willingly doth God remit his Ire,
Though late repenting him of Mandeprav'd,
Griev'd at his heart, when looking down he ſaw
The whole Earth fill'd with violence, and all fleſh
Corrupting each thir way; yet thoſe remoov'd,
Such grace ſhall one juſt Man find in his ſight,
That he relents, nor to blot out mankind,
And makes a Covenant never to deſtroy
The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea
Surpaſs his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World
With Man therein or Beaſt; but when he brings
Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein ſet
His triple-colour'd Bow, whereon to look
And call to mind his Cov'nant: Day and Night,
Seed time and Harveſt, Heat and hoary Froſt
Shall hold thir courſe, till fire purge all things new.
Both Heav'n and Earth, wherein the juſt ſhall dwell.
