---
position: 5
label: "III. On the critique of the power of judgment, as a means of connecting philosophy's two parts into one whole"
depth: 2
aa_page: 176
---

## III. On the critique of the power of judgment, as a means of connecting philosophy's two parts into one whole

The critique of the faculties of cognition, in view of what they are able to achieve ***a priori***, possesses in truth no domain with respect to objects: for it is no doctrine, but has only to examine whether, and how, given the constitution of our faculties, a doctrine is possible through them. Its field extends to all the pretensions of those faculties, so as to confine them within the bounds of their legitimacy. Yet whatever has no place in the division of philosophy may still be admitted, as a {{ XXI }} principal part, into the general critique of the pure faculty of cognition, namely if it contains principles that on their own are fit for neither theoretical nor practical use.

The concepts of nature, which contain the ground for all theoretical cognition a priori, rested on the understanding's legislation. — The concept of freedom, which contained the ground for all sensibly-unconditioned practical precepts _a priori_, rested on the legislation of reason. Both faculties, then, besides being applicable according to logical form to principles of whatever origin, moreover each has its own legislation {{{ 177 }}} as regards content, beyond which no other exists (_a priori_), and which therefore justifies the division of philosophy into the theoretical and the practical.

Yet within the family of the higher faculties of cognition there is, after all, a middle member between the understanding and reason. This is the ***power of judgment***, of which one has reason, by analogy, to surmise that it likewise might well contain within itself, if not a legislation of its own, still a principle of its own for the search after laws—at most a merely subjective one—_a priori_: which, even though no field of objects should belong to it as its domain, may nonetheless have some ground or other, and a certain constitution thereof, for which {{ XXII }} precisely this principle alone might hold good.

To this, however (judging by analogy), there is added a further ground for bringing the power of judgment into connection with another ordering of our powers of representation—one that seems to be of still greater importance than that of the kinship it bears to the family of cognitive faculties. For all the powers or capacities of the soul can be traced back to the three that admit of no further derivation from a common ground: the ***faculty of cognition***, the ***feeling of pleasure and displeasure***, and the ***faculty of desire***[^*]. {{{ 178 }}} For the faculty of cognition the understanding alone is legislative, when {{ XXIII }} that faculty (as must indeed happen when it is considered on its own, without any admixture {{ XXIV }} with the faculty of desire) is related, as a faculty of a ***theoretical cognition***, to nature, in regard to which alone (as appearance) it is possible for us to give laws through concepts of nature _a priori_, which are properly pure concepts of the understanding. — For the faculty of desire, taken as a higher faculty under the concept of freedom, reason alone (in which alone this concept has its place) is legislative _a priori_. — Now, between the faculty of cognition and the faculty of desire the feeling of pleasure is contained, just as the power of judgment is contained between the understanding and reason. It is therefore at least provisionally to be surmised that the power of judgment likewise contains for itself a principle _a priori_ and that, since pleasure or displeasure is necessarily bound up with the faculty of desire (whether, as in the lower faculty, it precedes that faculty's principle, or, as in the {{ XXV }} {{{ 179 }}} higher one, follows only from the determination of that faculty by the moral law), it will likewise effect a passage from the pure faculty of cognition, i.e. from the domain of the concepts of nature, over into the domain of the concept of freedom, exactly as, in its logical employment, it renders possible the passage from the understanding to reason.

Thus even though philosophy can be divided only into two principal parts, the theoretical and the practical; even though everything we might have to say about the peculiar principles of the power of judgment would have to be counted, within it, toward the theoretical part, i.e. rational cognition according to concepts of nature: the critique of pure reason, which has to settle all of this in advance of undertaking that system, for the sake of the latter's possibility, nevertheless comprises three parts—the critique of the pure understanding, of the pure power of judgment, and of the pure reason—faculties that are called pure just because they are legislative _a priori_.

[^*]: It is of use, for concepts that one employs as empirical principles, when one has reason to surmise that they stand in kinship _a priori_ with the pure faculty of cognition, to attempt, on account of this relation, a transcendental definition: namely by means of the pure categories, insofar as these of themselves already indicate sufficiently how the concept in question differs from others. In this one follows the mathematician's example, who leaves the empirical data of his task undetermined and brings only their relation, in the pure synthesis of those data, under the concepts of pure arithmetic, thereby generalizing the solution he reaches. — On account of a similar procedure (Crit. of Pract. R., p. 16 [9] of the preface) a reproach has been made against me, and my own definition of the faculty of desire, as the ***faculty of being, through its representations, the cause of the reality of the objects of these representations***, has been censured: on the ground that mere wishes too would be desires, and yet everyone concedes that through these alone he cannot bring forth their object. — This, however, proves nothing more than that there are also desires in the human being through which he stands in contradiction with himself: inasmuch as he works, by his representation alone, toward the production of the object, from which he can nevertheless expect no success, because he is aware that his mechanical forces (if I may thus designate the non-psychological ones), which would have to be determined by that representation in order to effect the object (and thus mediately), are either not adequate or else aim at something impossible, e.g. to make what has happened not to have happened (_O mihi praeteritos, etc._), or, in impatient waiting, to be able to annihilate the interval up to the longed-for moment. — Even though, in such fantastic desires, we are aware of the inadequacy of our representations (or indeed of their unfitness) for being the ***cause*** of their objects: still the relation of these representations as cause, and hence the representation of their ***causality***, is present in every ***wish***, and becomes especially visible when the wish is an affect, namely ***longing***. For such longings prove, by the very way in which they distend the heart and make it wither, and so exhaust the powers, that the powers are repeatedly tensed anew by representations, but that they let the mind, in view of the impossibility, sink back ceaselessly again into lassitude. Even prayers for the averting of great and, so far as one can see, unavoidable evils, and many a superstitious means for attaining ends that are naturally impossible, prove the causal relation of representations to their objects—a relation that cannot be held back from striving toward the effect even by the consciousness of its inadequacy to that effect. — But why the propensity to consciously empty desires has been placed in our nature is an anthropological-teleological question. It seems that, were we not to be determined to the exertion of our powers until we had first assured ourselves of the adequacy of our capacity for producing an object, these powers would for the most part remain unused. For commonly we first come to know our powers only by trying them out. This deception in empty wishes is thus merely the consequence of a beneficent arrangement in our nature.
