---
position: 19
label: "§ 3. The satisfaction in the agreeable is combined with interest"
depth: 5
aa_page: 205
---

## § 3. The satisfaction in the agreeable is combined with interest

***That is agreeable which pleases the senses in sensation.*** Here at once an occasion presents itself to censure a very common confusion of the twofold meaning that the word sensation can carry, and to draw attention to it. All satisfaction (so one says or thinks) is itself sensation (of a pleasure). Consequently {{{ 206 }}} everything that pleases is, precisely in this, that it pleases, agreeable (and, according to the {{ 8 }} various degrees, or also relations to other agreeable sensations, ***graceful, lovely, delightful, gladdening*** and so forth). But once this is conceded, then impressions of the senses, which determine inclination, or principles of reason, which determine the will, or mere reflected forms of intuition, which determine the power of judgment, are, so far as the effect upon the feeling of pleasure is concerned, altogether one and the same. For this effect would be the agreeableness in the sensation of one's own state, and since, after all, all working of our faculties must ultimately issue in the practical and converge there as in its goal, one could ask of them no other appraisal of things and of their worth than the one that consists in the gratification they promise. The manner in which they arrive at it is in the end of no consequence at all; and since here the choice of means alone can make any difference, human beings might indeed charge one another with folly and want of understanding, but never with baseness and malice: for after all they are, each according to his own way of viewing things, running toward one goal, which for everyone is gratification.

When a determination of the feeling of pleasure or displeasure is called sensation, this expression signifies something quite other than when I call the representation of a thing (through the senses, as a receptivity belonging to the faculty of cognition) sensation. For in the latter {{ 9 }} case the representation is referred to the object, whereas in the former it is referred solely to the subject and serves no cognition whatsoever, not even the one by which the subject ***cognizes*** itself.

In the explanation given above, however, we understand by the word sensation an objective representation of the senses; and, so as not always to run the risk of being misconstrued, we shall name that which must at all times remain merely subjective and which can in no way constitute a representation of an object by the otherwise usual name of feeling. The green color of the meadows belongs to ***objective*** sensation, as the perception of an object of sense; but the agreeableness of that color belongs to ***subjective*** sensation, through which no object is represented: that is, to feeling, through which the object is regarded as an object of satisfaction (which is no cognition of it).

That my judgment about an object, whereby I declare it to be {{{ 207 }}} agreeable, expresses an interest in it is clear already from the fact that through sensation it stirs up a desire for objects of that kind, and hence that the satisfaction presupposes not the mere judgment about it, but the bearing of its existence upon my state insofar as that state is affected by such an object. Hence of the agreeable one does not merely say: it ***pleases***, but rather: it ***gratifies***. It is not {{ 10 }} a mere assent that I bestow on it; rather, inclination is thereby produced; and to that which is agreeable in the liveliest way there belongs so utterly no judgment about the constitution of the object that those who are ever bent solely on enjoyment (for that is the word by which one denotes the inwardness of gratification) gladly excuse themselves from all judging.
