---
position: 28
label: "§ 10. On purposiveness in general"
depth: 5
aa_page: 219
---

## § 10. On purposiveness in general

Should one wish to give an account of what an end is in terms of its transcendental determinations (without assuming anything empirical, such as the feeling of pleasure, {{{ 220 }}}), then: an end is the object of a concept insofar as that concept is viewed as the cause of the object (as the real basis upon which its possibility rests); and the causality that a ***concept*** exercises in regard to its ***object*** constitutes purposiveness (_forma finalis_). Accordingly, wherever one conceives that it is not merely the cognition of an object, but the object itself (its form or its existence), that as an effect becomes possible solely through a concept of that effect, one is there thinking of an end. In this case the representation of the effect functions as the ground that determines its cause {{ 33 }}, preceding the cause itself. Consciousness of a representation's causality with respect to the state of the subject — namely, ***to maintain*** the subject in that very state — can here in general designate what we call pleasure; whereas displeasure is that representation which holds within it the ground for determining the state of the representations into their own opposite (for holding them off or clearing them away).

The faculty of desire, to the extent that it can be determined solely by concepts — that is, to act in conformity with the representation of an end — would amount to the will. Yet a thing — whether an object, a state of mind, or an action — is also termed purposive even though its possibility does not necessarily presuppose the representation of an end, and this simply because we can explain and comprehend that possibility only insofar as we posit, at its basis, a causality operating according to ends, i.e., a will that would have ordered the thing thus in keeping with the representation of a certain rule. Purposiveness may thus be present even in the absence of an end, provided we do not situate the causes of such a form within a will, while nevertheless being able to render the account of its possibility comprehensible to ourselves only by tracing it back to a will. Now we do not always have need to grasp through reason (as regards its possibility) that which we observe. Hence we can at least observe a purposiveness as regards form, even without laying at its basis an end {{ 34 }} (as the matter of the _nexus finalis_), and can notice it in objects, though in no other way than through reflection.
