---
position: 30
label: "§ 12. The judgment of taste rests on grounds _a priori_"
depth: 5
aa_page: 221
---

## § 12. The judgment of taste rests on grounds _a priori_

It is utterly impossible to make out _a priori_ the linkage between a feeling of pleasure or displeasure, taken as an effect, and any representation (sensation or concept) serving as its cause; for such a thing would be a causal relation that, among objects of experience, {{{ 222 }}} can at all times be known only _a posteriori_ and through experience itself {{ 36 }}. It is true that in the Critique of Practical Reason we did indeed derive the feeling of respect (as a particular and distinctive modification of this feeling, one that will not quite square either with the pleasure or the displeasure that we obtain from empirical objects) _a priori_ from universal ethical concepts. Yet in that context we could also step beyond the limits of experience and call forth a causality grounded in a supersensible constitution of the subject — the causality, namely, of freedom. Yet even there we did not, properly speaking, derive this ***feeling*** from the idea of the ethical as its cause; rather, only the determination of the will was derived from it. The mental state, however, of a will determined by whatever means is already in itself a feeling of pleasure, indeed one and the same with it, and so does not issue from it as an effect: this last would need to be supposed only were the concept of the ethical, taken as a good, to run ahead of the will's determination by the law; since in that case the pleasure joined to that concept would be drawn from it, as a mere cognition, in vain.

Now with the pleasure in the aesthetic judgment the case stands in a similar way: only that here it is merely contemplative, and brings about no interest in the object, whereas in the moral judgment it is practical. That awareness of the merely formal purposiveness at work in the play of the subject's cognitive powers {{ 37 }}, upon a representation whereby some object is given, simply is the pleasure itself; for within an aesthetic judgment it comprises a ground that determines the subject's activity as regards the enlivening of those very cognitive powers — hence an inner causality (one that is purposive) bearing upon cognition in general, yet without being confined to any determinate cognition, and consequently a mere form of the subjective purposiveness of a representation. This pleasure is likewise in no way practical, neither in the manner of that stemming from the pathological ground of agreeableness, nor of that stemming from the intellectual ground of the good as represented. It does, however, carry a causality within itself, namely that of ***preserving*** the state of the representation itself and the engagement of the cognitive powers without any further aim. We ***dwell*** upon the beholding of the beautiful, because this beholding reinforces and reproduces itself: which is analogous to (though yet not the same as) that lingering in which a charm in the representation of the object repeatedly rouses the attention, while the mind remains passive.
