---
position: 35
label: "§ 17. On the ideal of beauty"
depth: 5
aa_page: 231
---

## {{ 53 }} § 17. On the ideal of beauty

There can be no objective rule of taste that would determine through concepts what is beautiful. For every judgment from this source is aesthetic; i.e., the feeling of the subject and no concept of an object is its determining ground. To seek a principle of taste that would give the universal criterion of the beautiful through determinate concepts is a fruitless effort, because what is sought is impossible and in itself contradictory. The universal communicability of the sensation (of satisfaction or dissatisfaction), and indeed one that takes place without a concept, the unanimity, so far as possible, of all times and {{{ 232 }}} peoples with respect to this feeling in the representation of certain objects: is the empirical, although weak and barely sufficient for conjecture, criterion of the descent of a taste so confirmed by examples from the deeply hidden ground, common to all human beings, of the unanimity in judging the forms under which objects are given to them.

Hence one regards some products of taste as ***exemplary***: not as if taste could be acquired by imitating others. For taste must be a faculty of one's own; but whoever imitates a model shows, insofar as he succeeds in it, indeed skill, {{ 54 }} but only taste insofar as he himself can judge this model.[^*] From this it follows, however, that the highest model, the archetype of taste, is a mere idea that everyone must bring forth in himself, and according to which he must judge everything that is an object of taste, that is an example of judging through taste, and even the taste of everyone. ***Idea*** properly signifies a concept of reason and ***ideal*** the representation of a single being as adequate to an idea. Hence that archetype of taste, which indeed rests on the indeterminate idea of reason of a maximum, but yet can be represented not through concepts but only in a single presentation, can better be called the ideal of the beautiful, which, even though we are not in possession of it, we yet strive to bring forth in ourselves. But it will be merely an ideal of the imagination, precisely because it rests not on concepts but on presentation; but the faculty {{ 55 }} of presentation is the imagination. — How, then, do we arrive at such an ideal of beauty? _A priori_ or empirically? Likewise: which species of the beautiful is capable of an ideal?

First it is well to note that the beauty for which an ideal is to be sought must be no ***vague*** beauty but a beauty ***fixed*** by a concept of objective purposiveness, consequently must belong to no object of an entirely pure but to that of a partly intellectualized judgment of taste {{{ 233 }}}. I.e., in whatever kind of grounds of judging an ideal is to take place, there some idea of reason according to determinate concepts must lie at the ground, which determines _a priori_ the end on which the inner possibility of the object rests. An ideal of beautiful flowers, of a beautiful set of furnishings, of a beautiful view cannot be thought. But neither can an ideal be represented of a beauty adhering to determinate ends, e.g., a beautiful dwelling-house, a beautiful tree, a beautiful garden, etc.; presumably because the ends are not sufficiently determined and fixed by their concept, consequently the purposiveness is almost as free as in the case of ***vague*** beauty. Only that which has the end of its existence in itself, the ***human being***, who can determine his ends himself through reason, or, where he must take them from outer perception, can yet hold them together with essential and universal ends and then also {{ 56 }} judge aesthetically the accordance with the latter: this ***human being*** is thus alone capable, among all objects in the world, of an ideal of ***beauty***, just as humanity in his person, as an intelligence, is alone capable of the ideal of ***perfection***.

To this, however, two things belong: ***first***, the aesthetic ***normal idea***, which is a single intuition (of the imagination) that represents the standard for judging it as a thing belonging to a particular animal species; ***second***, the ***rational idea***, which makes the ends of humanity, insofar as they cannot be represented sensibly, the principle for judging its figure, through which, as their effect in appearance, those ends reveal themselves. The normal idea must take its elements for the figure of an animal of a particular genus from experience; but the greatest purposiveness in the construction of the figure, which would be suitable as a universal standard for the aesthetic judging of every individual of this species, the image which has as it were intentionally lain at the ground of the technique of nature, to which only the genus as a whole, but no single one taken apart is adequate, lies yet merely in the idea of the one judging, which, however, with its proportions, as an aesthetic idea, can be presented entirely _in concreto_ in an exemplary image. In order to make somewhat comprehensible how this comes about {{ 57 }} (for who can wrest from nature its secret entirely?), let us attempt a psychological explanation.

It is to be noted: that in a way entirely incomprehensible to us the {{{ 234 }}} imagination knows not only how to recall, on occasion, even after a long time, the signs for concepts; but also to reproduce the image and the figure of the object out of an unspeakable number of objects of different kinds or even of one and the same kind; indeed even, when the mind sets about making comparisons, in all probability really, although not sufficiently to consciousness, to let one image as it were fall upon another and, through the congruence of several of the same kind, to obtain a mean that serves all as a common measure. Someone has seen a thousand adult men. If he now wants to judge about the comparatively to-be-estimated normal magnitude, then (in my opinion) the imagination lets a great number of the images (perhaps all those thousand) fall upon one another; and if it is permitted me to apply here the analogy of optical presentation, in the space where the most of them are united, and within the outline where the place is illuminated with the most strongly applied color, there the ***mean magnitude*** becomes recognizable, which is equidistant, in height as in breadth, from the outermost boundaries of the largest and smallest statures; and this is the {{ 58 }} stature for a beautiful man. (One could obtain the very same thing mechanically if one measured all thousand, added their heights together and their breadths (and thicknesses) for themselves, and divided the sum by a thousand. But the imagination does precisely this through a dynamical effect that arises from the manifold apprehension of such figures upon the organ of inner sense.) If now in a similar way for this mean man the mean head is sought, for this the mean nose, etc., then this figure lies at the ground of the normal idea of the beautiful man in the country where this comparison is instituted; hence a Negro must necessarily, under these empirical conditions, have a different normal idea of the beauty of the figure than a white man, the Chinese a different one than the European. With the ***model*** of a beautiful horse or dog (of a certain breed) it would go just the same. — This ***normal idea*** is not derived from proportions taken from experience ***as determinate rules;*** rather, it is according to it that rules of judging first become possible. It is the image, hovering among all the single, variously different intuitions of individuals, for the whole genus, which nature laid at the ground as an archetype for her productions in the same species, {{{ 235 }}} but which she seems not to have fully attained in any single one. It is by no means {{ 59 }} the whole ***archetype*** of ***beauty*** in this genus, but only the form that constitutes the indispensable condition of all beauty, hence merely the ***correctness*** in the presentation of the genus. It is, as ***Polyclitus's*** famous ***Doryphorus*** was called, the ***rule*** (for the very same purpose ***Myron's*** cow could also be used in its genus). For that very reason it can also contain nothing specifically characteristic; for otherwise it would not be a ***normal idea*** for the genus. Its presentation also pleases not through beauty but merely because it contradicts no condition under which alone a thing of this genus can be beautiful. The presentation is merely academically correct.[^**]

From the ***normal idea*** of the beautiful, however, the ***ideal*** of it is still distinguished, which one may expect solely in the ***human figure*** for reasons already adduced. In this, now, the ideal consists in the expression of the ***moral***, without which the object {{ 60 }} would not please universally and moreover positively (not merely negatively in an academically correct presentation). The visible expression of moral ideas that inwardly govern the human being can indeed be taken only from experience; but to make as it were visible in bodily expression (as the effect of the inner) their connection with everything that our reason combines with the morally good in the idea of the highest purposiveness — goodness of soul, or purity, or strength, or repose, etc.: for this there are required pure ideas of reason and great power of the imagination united in him who would only judge them, much more in him who would present them. The correctness of such an ideal {{{ 236 }}} of beauty proves itself in this: that it permits no sensory charm to mix into the satisfaction in its object and yet allows a great interest to be taken in it; which then proves that the judging according to such a standard can never be purely aesthetic, and that the judging according to an ideal of beauty is no mere judgment of {{ 61 }} taste.

Explanation of the beautiful inferred from this third moment.

***Beauty*** is the form of the ***purposiveness*** of an object, insofar as it is perceived in it ***without the representation of an end***.[^***]

[^*]: Models of taste with respect to the verbal arts must be composed in a dead and learned language: the first, so as not to have to endure the change that unavoidably befalls living languages, whereby noble expressions become flat, common ones become obsolete, and newly created ones are brought into a circulation lasting only a short time; the second, so that it may have a grammar that is subject to no wanton change of fashion, but has its unalterable rule.
[^**]: One will find that a perfectly regular face, which a painter might ask to sit for him as a model, ordinarily says nothing: because it contains nothing characteristic, hence expresses more the idea of the genus than the specific of a person. The characteristic of this kind, which is exaggerated, i.e., which does detriment to the normal idea (the purposiveness of the genus) itself, is called ***caricature***. Experience also shows that those entirely regular faces ordinarily betray inwardly only a mediocre human being; presumably (if it may be assumed that nature in the outer expresses the proportions of the inner) for this reason: because, if none of the dispositions of mind is prominent above the proportion that is required merely to constitute a faultless human being, nothing of what one calls ***genius*** may be expected, in which nature seems to depart from her usual relations of the powers of mind to the advantage of a single one.
[^***]: One could adduce as an instance against this explanation: that there are things in which one sees a purposive form without recognizing in them an end; e.g., the stone implements often drawn out of old burial mounds, furnished with a hole as if for a handle, which, although they clearly betray in their figure a purposiveness whose end one does not know, are nevertheless not for that reason declared beautiful. But that one regards them as a work of art is already enough to have to admit that one relates their figure to some intention and a determinate end. Hence also no immediate satisfaction at all in their intuition. A flower, by contrast, e.g., a tulip, is held to be beautiful because a certain purposiveness, which, as we judge it, is related to no end at all, is encountered in its perception.
