---
position: 59
label: "§ 34. No objective principle of taste is possible"
depth: 5
aa_page: 285
---

## {{ 143 }} § 34. No objective principle of taste is possible

By a principle of taste one would mean a fundamental proposition on whose condition the concept of an object might be brought under it, so that one could then, by inference, arrive at the result that the object is beautiful. But this is flatly impossible. For it is directly in the representation of the object that that I must feel the pleasure, and no grounds of proof can talk me into having it. Thus although critics, as ***Hume*** remarks, can reason more plausibly than cooks, they nonetheless share one and the same fate with them. The determining ground of their judgment cannot be looked for in the strength of proofs, but only in the {{{ 286 }}} reflecting that the subject carries out upon its own state (of pleasure or displeasure), with all prescriptions and rules set aside.

But that about which critics can and nevertheless should reason, in such a way that it serves toward the correction and extension of our judgments of taste, is not to lay out the determining ground of this kind of aesthetic judgment in a universally usable formula, which is impossible; rather it is to conduct an inquiry into the cognitive faculties and their business in these judgments, and to set forth in examples the reciprocal subjective purposiveness, {{ 144 }} of which it was shown above that its form in a given representation is the beauty of that representation's object. Thus the critique of taste is, in itself, merely subjective as regards the representation whereby an object comes to be given to us: that is, it is the art or the science of subsuming under rules the mutual bearing that understanding and imagination have on each other within the given representation (leaving aside any prior sensation or concept), and thus their agreement or disagreement, and of determining them as regards their conditions. It is ***art*** when it shows this only through examples; it is ***science*** when it traces the possibility of any such judging back to the very nature of these faculties, taken as faculties of cognition as such. It is with the latter, as a transcendental critique, with which alone we are here concerned throughout. It is to develop the subjective principle of taste, and to justify it, as a principle _a priori_ of the power of judgment. Criticism practiced as an art merely seeks to bring to bear, on the judging of its objects, the physiological (here psychological), and hence empirical, rules by which taste in fact operates (without pausing to consider how they are possible), and it passes critical judgment on the products of fine art; just as ***the former*** passes judgment on the faculty itself by which they are judged.
