---
position: 61
label: "§ 36. On the task of a deduction of judgments of taste"
depth: 5
aa_page: 287
---

## {{ 147 }} § 36. On the task of a deduction of judgments of taste

With the perception of an object, the concept of an object in general — of which that perception contains the empirical {{{ 288 }}} predicates — can be immediately combined into a cognitive judgment, and thereby a judgment of experience be produced. At the basis of this there now lie concepts _a priori_ of the synthetic unity of the manifold of intuition, so as to think it as the determination of an object; and such concepts — the categories — call for a deduction, one that was likewise supplied in the Critique of Pure Reason, whereby the resolution of the task could also be brought about: How are synthetic cognitive judgments _a priori_ possible? This task, then, bore upon the a priori principles of the pure understanding and its theoretical judgments.

Yet a perception, too, may have immediately combined with it a feeling of pleasure (or displeasure) and a satisfaction, which attends the object's representation and takes the place of a predicate for it, so that an aesthetic judgment — one that is not a cognitive judgment — thereby arises. For such a judgment — if it is not a mere judgment of sensation but a formal judgment of reflection, one that demands this satisfaction of everyone as necessary — there must, as a principle _a priori_, lie at its {{ 148 }} basis something which may at most be merely subjective (should an objective principle be impossible for judgments of this kind), but which even as such requires a deduction, so that it may be comprehended how an aesthetic judgment can lay claim to necessity. On this now rests the task with which we are now occupied: How are judgments of taste possible? A task, then, which concerns the principles _a priori_ of the pure power of judgment in ***aesthetic*** judgments — that is, in such judgments where it does not (as in the theoretical) merely have to subsume under objective concepts of the understanding and stand under a law, but where it is, subjectively, at once its own object and its own law.

This task can also be represented thus: How is a judgment possible which, merely from one's ***own*** feeling of pleasure in an object and independently of that object's concept, judges this pleasure, as something attaching to the representation of that very object ***in every other subject***, _a priori_ — that is, without having to wait upon the assent of others?

It is easy to see that judgments of taste are synthetic, for they reach past the object's concept and even past its intuition, appending to that intuition, as a predicate, something that is not even cognition — namely, a feeling of pleasure (or displeasure). But that they are nonetheless — although the predicate here, namely the ***own*** pleasure that the representation carries with it, is empirical {{ 149 }} — judgments _a priori_ as regards the required assent ***of everyone*** {{{ 289 }}}, or wish to be taken for such, this too is already contained in the very terms of their claim; and so this task of the critique of the power of judgment falls under transcendental philosophy's general problem: How are synthetic judgments _a priori_ possible?
