---
position: 64
label: "§ 39. On the Communicability of a Sensation"
depth: 5
aa_page: 291
---

## § 39. On the Communicability of a Sensation

When sensation, as the real of perception, is related to cognition, it is called sensation of sense; and the specificity of its quality can be conceived as universally communicable in the same way only if one assumes that everyone has a sense identical to ours: this, however, absolutely cannot be presupposed of a sensation of sense. So, to someone who lacks the sense of smell, this kind of sensation cannot be communicated; and even if he does not lack it, one still cannot be sure whether he has precisely the same sensation from a flower that we have from it. Yet we must conceive of humans as even more different with regard to the ***agreeableness*** or ***disagreeableness*** in the sensation of the very same object of the senses; and it is absolutely not to be demanded that pleasure in such objects be conceded by everyone. One can call the pleasure of this {{{ 292 }}} kind, because it enters the mind through the sense and we are therefore passive in it, the pleasure of ***enjoyment***.

On the other hand, satisfaction in an action for the sake of its moral character {{ 154 }} is not a pleasure of enjoyment, but of self-activity and its conformity with the idea of one's vocation. This feeling, which is called the moral feeling, however, requires concepts and represents not a free but a lawful purposiveness, and thus can also not be universally communicated otherwise than by means of reason and, if the pleasure is to be of the same kind in everyone, through very determinate practical concepts of reason.

The pleasure in the sublime of nature, as a pleasure of ratiocinating contemplation, does indeed also claim universal participation, but yet already presupposes another feeling, namely that of one's supersensible vocation: which, however obscure it may be, has a moral foundation. But that other human beings will take this into consideration and find a satisfaction in the contemplation of the rugged greatness of nature (which truly cannot be attributed to the sight of it, which is rather terrifying), I am not entitled to presuppose absolutely. Notwithstanding this, in view of the fact that those moral predispositions ought to be taken into consideration on every suitable occasion, I can indeed demand that satisfaction of everyone, but only by means of the moral law, which in its turn is grounded on concepts of reason.

By contrast, pleasure in the beautiful is neither a pleasure of enjoyment nor {{ 155 }} of a lawful activity, nor even of ratiocinating contemplation according to ideas, but of mere reflection. Without having any purpose or principle as a guide, this pleasure accompanies the common apprehension of an object by the imagination, as the faculty of intuition, in relation to the understanding, as the faculty of concepts, by means of a procedure of the power of judgment, which it must also exercise for the behoof of the commonest experience: only that here it is obliged to do so for the sake of an empirical objective concept, but there (in aesthetic judgment) merely to perceive the adequacy of the representation for the harmonious (subjectively purposive) employment of both cognitive faculties in their freedom, i.e., to feel the representational state with pleasure. This pleasure must necessarily rest on the same conditions in everyone, because they are subjective conditions of the possibility of a cognition in general, and the proportion of these {{{ 293 }}} cognitive faculties which is required for taste is also required for that common and healthy understanding which one may presuppose in everyone. For this very reason, the one who judges with taste (provided he does not err in this consciousness and does not mistake the matter for the form, charm for beauty) may demand the subjective purposiveness, i.e., {{ 156 }} his satisfaction in the object, of everyone else, and assume his feeling to be universally communicable, and that without the mediation of concepts.
