---
position: 73
label: "§ 48. On the Relation of Genius to Taste"
depth: 5
aa_page: 311
---

## {{{ 311 }}} § 48. On the Relation of Genius to Taste

For the ***judging*** of beautiful objects as such, ***taste*** is required, but for beautiful art itself, i.e., the ***production*** of such objects, ***genius*** is required.

If one considers genius as a talent for beautiful art (which the peculiar meaning of the word carries with it) and, with this intention, wishes to analyze it into the faculties that must come together to constitute such a talent: then it is necessary first to determine precisely the difference between natural beauty, the judging of which requires only taste, and artistic beauty, the possibility of which (to which regard must also be paid in the judging {{ 188 }} of such an object) requires genius.

A natural beauty is a ***beautiful thing***; artistic beauty is a ***beautiful representation*** of a thing.

In order to judge a natural beauty as such, I do not need to have a prior concept of what kind of thing the object is supposed to be; i.e., I do not need to know its material purposiveness (the purpose), but the mere form pleases by itself in the judging without any knowledge of the purpose. If, however, the object is given as a product of art and is to be declared beautiful as such: then, because art always presupposes a purpose in the cause (and its causality), a concept of what the thing is supposed to be must first be laid at the basis; and since the agreement of the manifold in a thing with an internal determination of it as a purpose is the perfection of the thing, the perfection of the thing must at the same time be taken into account in the judging of artistic beauty, of which there is no question at all in the judging of a natural beauty (as such). — To be sure, in the judging chiefly of animate objects of nature, e.g., of a human being or of a horse, objective purposiveness is also commonly taken into consideration in order to judge {{ 189 }} of their beauty; but then the judgment is also no longer purely aesthetic, i.e., a mere judgment of taste. Nature is no longer judged as it appears as art, but rather insofar as it actually ***is*** (though superhuman) art; and the teleological judgment serves the aesthetic as {{{ 312 }}} a foundation and condition, of which the latter must take account. In such a case, when one says, e.g., "that is a beautiful woman," one in fact thinks nothing other than: nature beautifully represents in her figure the purposes in the female build; for one must look beyond the mere form to a concept, so that the object may be thought in such a manner through a logically conditioned aesthetic judgment.

Beautiful art shows its very excellence precisely in this, that it describes beautifully things that in nature would be ugly or displeasing. The Furies, diseases, devastations of war, and the like can, as harmful things, be described very beautifully, and even presented in paintings; only one kind of ugliness cannot be presented in conformity with nature without destroying all aesthetic satisfaction, and consequently artistic beauty itself: namely, that which excites ***disgust***. For because in this strange sensation, resting on mere imagination, the object is represented, as it were, as if it were obtruding itself for enjoyment, against which {{ 190 }} we nevertheless strive with violence: the artistic representation of the object is no longer distinguished in our sensation from the nature of the object itself, and the former then cannot possibly be held to be beautiful. Sculpture also, because in its products art is almost conflated with nature, has excluded from its creations the immediate representation of ugly objects, and has instead permitted, e.g., death (in a beautiful genius), or military courage (in Mars) to be represented by means of an allegory or attributes that look pleasing, consequently only indirectly by means of an interpretation of reason and not for the mere aesthetic power of judgment.

So much for the beautiful representation of an object, which is actually only the form of the presentation of a concept through which the latter is universally communicated. — But to give this form to the product of beautiful art requires merely taste, to which the artist, after he has practiced and corrected it by various examples of art or nature, holds his work, and, after many often laborious attempts to satisfy it, finds that form which satisfies him: hence this is not, as it were, a matter of inspiration or of a free momentum of the mental powers, but of a slow and indeed painful retouching, in order to make it adequate to the thought {{ 191 }} {{{ 313 }}} and yet not detrimental to the freedom in the play of the same.

Taste, however, is merely a faculty of judging, not a productive one; and what is in conformity with it is on that very account not a work of beautiful art: it can be a product belonging to useful and mechanical art, or even to science, according to definite rules that can be learned and must be precisely followed. The pleasing form, however, that one gives to it is only the vehicle of communication and, as it were, a manner of presentation, in regard to which one still remains free to a certain extent, even if it is otherwise bound to a determinate purpose. Thus one demands that tableware, or even a moral treatise, and indeed a sermon, must have in themselves this form of beautiful art without, however, appearing ***labored***; but one will not on that account call them works of beautiful art. To the latter, however, a poem, a piece of music, a picture gallery, and the like are counted; and there one can often perceive in a work of beautiful art that is supposed to be such, genius without taste, and in another, taste without genius.
