---
position: 81
label: "§ 55."
depth: 3
aa_page: 337
---

## § 55.

For a power of judgment to be dialectical, it must first of all be ratiocinating; that is to say, the judgments it delivers have to claim universality, and to do so a priori[^*], since the dialectic lies precisely in the mutual opposition of judgments of that kind. That is why the incompatibility of aesthetic judgments of sense (regarding the agreeable and the disagreeable) is not, for its part, dialectical. The conflict of judgments of taste, too, insofar as everyone appeals merely to his own taste, constitutes no dialectic of taste: because {{ 232 }} no one intends to turn his own judgment into a universal rule. There thus remains no concept of any dialectic that could bear on taste except one belonging to a dialectic of the ***critique*** of taste (and not to taste itself) in regard to its ***principles***: for with respect to the ground on which judgments of taste are possible at all, mutually opposed concepts arise in a natural and unavoidable manner. Accordingly, a transcendental critique of taste will contain a portion entitled to be called a dialectic of the aesthetic power of judgment, but only in the event that an antinomy turns up among the principles of this faculty—one that throws its lawfulness, and thus its inner possibility too, into doubt.

[^*]: Any judgment that announces itself as universal may be termed a ratiocinating judgment (_iudicium ratiocinans_); for to that degree it is fit to serve as the major premise within a syllogism of reason. A judgment of reason (_iudicium ratiocinatum_), by contrast, can be called only such a one as is thought of as the conclusion of a syllogism of reason, and consequently as grounded _a priori_.
