---
position: 90
label: "§ 62. On Objective Purposiveness which is Merely Formal, as Distinguished from Material Purposiveness"
depth: 3
aa_page: 362
---

## § 62. On Objective Purposiveness which is Merely Formal, as Distinguished from Material Purposiveness

All geometrical figures that are drawn according to a principle display in themselves a manifold, often admired objective purposiveness, namely, of suitability for the solution of many problems according to a single principle, and indeed of each of them in infinitely various ways. The purposiveness is here obviously objective and intellectual, but not merely subjective and aesthetic. For it expresses the adequacy of the figure for the generation of many intended shapes, and is recognized through reason. Yet this purposiveness does not make the concept of the object itself possible, i.e., the object is not regarded as possible merely in respect of this use.

In a figure so simple as the circle, there lies the ground for {{ 272 }} a solution to a multitude of problems, each of which would require much preparation on its own, and which yields itself as it were of its own accord as one of the infinitely many excellent properties of this figure. If, e.g., the problem is to construct a triangle from a given base line and the angle opposite to it, then the problem is indeterminate, i.e., it can be solved in an infinitely manifold way. Yet the circle comprises them all together, as the geometrical locus for all triangles that conform to this condition. Or, two lines are to intersect each other in such a way that the rectangle from the two parts of the one is equal to the rectangle from the two parts of the other: then the solution to the problem has, to all appearances, much difficulty. But all lines that intersect within the circle, whose {{{ 363 }}} circumference limits each of them, divide themselves of their own accord in this proportion. Other curved lines in turn offer other purposive solutions, which were not thought of at all in the rule that constitutes their construction. All conic sections by themselves and in comparison with one another are fruitful in principles for the solution of a multitude of possible problems, however simple their explanation is which determines their concept. — It is a real joy to look at the zeal of the ancient geometers with which they investigated these properties of lines of this {{ 273 }} kind, without allowing themselves to be led astray by the question of narrow minds as to what use this knowledge would be; e.g., that of the parabola, without knowing the law of gravity on earth, which would have offered them its application to the trajectory of heavy bodies (whose direction of gravity in their movement can be regarded as parallel); or that of the ellipse, without suspecting that a gravity is also to be found in heavenly bodies, and without knowing its law at different distances from the point of attraction, which makes them describe this line in free motion. While they, unbeknownst to themselves, worked in this for posterity, they delighted in a purposiveness in the essence of things which they could nevertheless present completely _a priori_ in its necessity. Plato, himself a master of this science, fell into enthusiasm over such an original constitution of things, to discover which we can dispense with all experience, and over the power of the mind to draw the harmony of beings from their supersensible principle (to which are added the properties of numbers, with which the mind plays in music), which raised him above empirical concepts to ideas that seemed to him explainable only through an intellectual community with the origin of all beings. No wonder that he excluded those ignorant of geometry from his school, thinking {{ 274 }} to derive from pure intuition, dwelling internally in the human mind, what Anaxagoras concluded from empirical objects and their combination of purposes. For in the necessity of that which is purposive and is so constituted as if it were intentionally so arranged for our use, but which nevertheless seems to belong originally to the essence of things without taking any account of our use, lies precisely the ground of the great admiration of nature, not so much outside of us as in our own reason; whereby it is indeed {{{ 364 }}} excusable that this admiration, through misunderstanding, might gradually rise to extravagant enthusiasm.

But this intellectual purposiveness, although it is objective (not subjective like the aesthetic one), can nevertheless, as regards its possibility, be conceived very well, though only in general, as merely formal (not real), i.e., as purposiveness without yet having to lay a purpose at its basis, and hence without teleology being necessary for it. The circular figure is an intuition that has been determined through the understanding according to a principle: the unity of this principle, which I arbitrarily assume and lay at the basis as a concept, applied to a form of intuition (space) which likewise is found in me merely as a representation, and indeed _a priori_, makes comprehensible the unity of many rules resulting from the construction of that concept, which are purposive in various possible {{ 275 }} intentions, without one being allowed to subject this purposiveness to a ***purpose*** or to any other ground of it. The case is not the same here as when I meet with order and regularity of trees, flower beds, walks, etc., in a totality of ***things*** outside me enclosed within certain limits, e.g., a garden, which I cannot hope to infer _a priori_ from my boundary of space made according to an arbitrary rule: because they are existing things that must be empirically given in order to be known, and not a mere representation in me determined according to an _a priori_ principle. Hence the latter (empirical) purposiveness, as ***real***, is dependent upon the concept of a purpose.

But the ground of admiration of a purposiveness perceived, although in the essence of things (insofar as their concepts can be constructed), can also be seen very well, and indeed as legitimate. The manifold rules whose unity (from a principle) excites this admiration are altogether synthetic, and do not follow from a ***concept*** of the object, e.g., of the circle, but require that this object be given in intuition. Thereby, however, this unity receives the appearance as if it empirically had an external ground of its rules distinct from our power of representation, and {{ 276 }} agreement of the object with the need of rules, which is peculiar to the understanding, were contingent in itself, hence possible only through a purpose expressly directed toward it. Now indeed, {{{ 365 }}} this very harmony, because despite all of this purposiveness it is nevertheless recognized not empirically but _a priori_, should of its own accord lead us to the realization that space, through the determination of which (by means of the imagination in accordance with a concept) the object was alone possible, is not a quality of things outside me, but a mere mode of representation in me, and thus that I ***introduce the purposiveness*** into the figure which I draw ***in conformity with a concept***, i.e., into my own mode of representing what is given to me externally, whatever it may be in itself, and am not empirically instructed about it by the latter, consequently requiring for it no special purpose outside me in the object. But because this reflection already requires a critical use of reason, and thus cannot be immediately contained in the judging of the object according to its properties: the latter directly offers me nothing but the union of heterogeneous rules (even in respect of what they have in them that is dissimilar) in a principle which, without requiring any special ground for it lying outside my concept and in general outside my representation _a priori_, {{ 277 }} is nevertheless recognized by me _a priori_ as true. Now ***astonishment*** is a shock to the mind from the incompatibility of a representation and the rule given through it with the principles already lying at its basis, which thus produces a doubt as to whether one has seen or judged correctly; but ***admiration*** is an ever-recurring astonishment despite the disappearance of this doubt. Consequently, the latter is a completely natural effect of that observed purposiveness in the essence of things (as appearances), which also cannot be blamed in this respect, since the agreement of that form of sensible intuition (which is called space) with the faculty of concepts (the understanding) is not only inexplicable to us because it is precisely this and no other, but is moreover expanding for the mind, as if to suspect something lying beyond those sensible representations in which, although unknown to us, the ultimate ground of that agreement may be found. To know this ground, indeed, is not necessary for us either, if it is merely a matter of the formal purposiveness of our _a priori_ representations; but even having merely to look out in that direction inspires at the same time admiration for the object that forces us to do so.

One is accustomed to call ***beauty*** the mentioned properties of geometrical {{{ 366 }}} shapes, as well as also of numbers, because of a certain purposiveness of them _a priori_ for all kinds of cognitive use that was not expected from the {{ 278 }} simplicity of their construction; and one speaks, e.g., of this or that ***beautiful*** property of the circle, which was discovered in this or that way. Yet it is no aesthetic judging through which we find them purposive; no judging without a concept, which made noticeable a merely ***subjective*** purposiveness in the free play of our cognitive faculties: but rather an intellectual judging according to concepts, which clearly makes known an objective purposiveness, i.e., suitability for all kinds of (infinitely manifold) purposes. One would have to call them a ***relative perfection*** rather than a beauty of the mathematical figure. The designation of an ***intellectual beauty*** cannot in general be properly allowed either: because otherwise the word beauty must lose all definite meaning, or intellectual satisfaction must lose all advantage over sensible satisfaction. Rather, one could call beautiful a ***demonstration*** of such properties, because through this the understanding as the faculty of concepts and the imagination as the faculty of representing them feel strengthened _a priori_ (which, together with the precision that reason introduces, is called the elegance of the demonstration): since here at least the satisfaction is subjective, although its ground lies in concepts, whereas perfection carries with it an objective {{ 279 }} satisfaction.
