---
position: 98
label: "§ 69. What an antinomy of the power of judgment is"
depth: 3
aa_page: 385
---

## § 69. What an antinomy of the power of judgment is

Of itself the ***determining*** power of judgment possesses no principles by which ***concepts of objects*** might be founded. It amounts to no autonomy, since all it does is ***subsume*** things beneath laws, or concepts, that are already given and function as its principles. For just this reason it too runs no risk of an antinomy of its own, nor of any conflict among its principles. Likewise the transcendental power of judgment, whose task consisted in subsuming the conditions under categories, was in itself not ***nomothetic***; rather it merely specified those conditions of sensible intuition beneath which a given concept, taken as a law of the understanding, can be granted reality (application): a matter over which it could never fall out with itself (in respect of its principles, at any rate).

The ***reflecting*** power of judgment, however, is required to subsume under a law {{ 312 }} that has not yet been given, and which is therefore really nothing more than a principle for reflecting on objects for which, from the objective side, we are wholly without a law, or without any concept of the object adequate to serve as a principle for the cases as they occur. Now since no employment of the cognitive faculties may be granted without principles, the reflecting power of judgment will, in such cases, have to become a principle to itself: and this principle, inasmuch as it is not objective and can furnish, for the intended purpose, no adequate ground of cognition of the object, is to function as a merely subjective principle governing the purposive use of the cognitive faculties, namely for reflecting upon a certain sort of objects. Thus, with regard to cases of that kind, the reflecting power of judgment does have maxims — indeed necessary ones — for the purpose of cognizing the laws of nature {{{ 386 }}} in experience, in order by their means to arrive at concepts, even should these be concepts of reason, whenever it stands wholly in need of such in order merely to acquaint itself with nature in accordance with its empirical laws. — Between these necessary maxims belonging to the reflecting power of judgment a conflict may now arise, and hence an antinomy, upon which a dialectic is grounded; and this dialectic, should each of two mutually conflicting maxims have its ground in the nature of the cognitive faculties, may be termed a natural one, bound up with an {{ 313 }} unavoidable semblance which criticism must expose and dissolve, lest it deceive us.
