---
position: 117
label: "§ 87. On the moral proof of the existence of God"
depth: 3
aa_page: 447
---

## § 87. On the moral proof of the existence of God

There is a ***physical teleology*** which provides a ground of proof sufficient for our theoretically reflecting power of judgment to assume the existence of an intelligent world-cause. But we {{ 419 }} find in ourselves, and still more in the concept of a rational being in general endowed with freedom (of its causality), also a ***moral teleology***, which, however, because the relation to ends in ourselves is determined _a priori_ together with the law of it, hence can be cognized as necessary, needs for this purpose no intelligent cause outside us for this inner lawfulness: just as little as we may, in the case of what we find purposive in the geometrical properties of figures (for all sorts of possible exercise of art), look beyond to a highest understanding that imparts this to them. But this moral teleology nevertheless concerns us as world-beings and thus as beings connected with other things in the world: upon which latter the same moral laws make it our precept to direct our judging, either as ends, or as objects with regard to which we ourselves are the final end. From this moral teleology now, which concerns the relation of our own causality to ends and even to a final end which must be aimed at by us in the world, likewise the reciprocal relation of the world to that moral end and the {{{ 448 }}} external possibility of its execution (toward which no physical teleology can give us guidance), there now arises the necessary question: whether it compels our rational judging to go beyond the world {{ 420 }} and to seek, for that relation of nature to the moral within us, an intelligent supreme principle, in order to represent nature to ourselves as purposive also in relation to the moral inner legislation and its possible execution. Consequently there is indeed a moral teleology; and this is connected with the ***nomothetic*** of freedom on the one hand and that of nature on the other just as necessarily as civil legislation is with the question where one is to seek the executive power, and as there is connection in everything in general in which reason is to provide a principle of the actuality of a certain lawful order of things, possible only according to ideas. — We will first present the progress of reason from that moral teleology and its relation to the physical, to ***theology***, and afterward make considerations about the possibility and conclusiveness of this manner of inference.

If one assumes the existence of certain things (or even only of certain forms of things) as contingent, hence as possible only through something else as cause: then one can seek for this causality the supreme, and so for the conditioned the unconditioned ground, either in the physical or in the teleological order (according to the _nexus effectivus_ or _finalis_). I.e., one can ask: which is the supreme productive cause? or what is the supreme (absolutely unconditioned) end {{ 421 }} of it, i.e., the final end of its production of this or of all its products in general? whereby then, to be sure, it is presupposed that this cause is capable of a representation of ends, hence is an intelligent being, or at least must be thought by us as acting according to the laws of such a being.

Now, if one follows the latter order, it is a ***principle*** to which even the commonest human reason is immediately compelled to give its assent: that, if a ***final end*** at all, which reason must provide _a priori_, is to take place, this can be none other than ***the human being*** (every rational world-being) ***under moral laws***.[^*] For (thus everyone judges): if the world consisted of {{ 422 }} {{{ 449 }}} nothing but lifeless beings, or even in part of living, but reasonless beings, then the existence of such a world would have no value at all, because in it there would exist no being that has the least concept of a value. If, on the contrary, there were also rational beings, but whose reason were able to set the value of the existence of things only in the relation of nature to them (their well-being), but not to procure such a value originally {{ 423 }} (in freedom) for itself: then there would indeed be (relative) ends in the world, but no (absolute) final end, because the existence of such rational beings would yet always be purposeless. But the moral laws are of the peculiar constitution that they prescribe something for reason as an end without condition, hence precisely as the concept of a final end requires it: and the existence of such a reason, which in the relation to ends can be for itself the supreme law, in other words the existence of rational beings under moral laws, can therefore alone be thought as the final end {{{ 450 }}} of the existence of a world. If, on the contrary, this is not so, then either there is no end at all for the existence of the world in the cause, or there lie at its basis ends without a final end.

The moral law, as the formal rational condition of the use of our freedom, obligates us by itself alone, without depending on any end as a material condition; but it yet also determines for us, and indeed _a priori_, a final end, to strive after which it makes us obligated: and this is the ***highest*** ***good in the world*** possible through freedom.

The subjective condition under which the human being (and according to all our concepts also every rational finite being) can set a final end for himself under the above law is happiness. Consequently, {{ 424 }} the highest physical good possible in the world, and to be promoted as a final end as far as is in us, is ***happiness***: under the objective condition of the agreement of the human being with the law of ***morality***, as the worthiness to be happy.

But these two requirements of the final end set for us by the moral law we cannot possibly, according to all our faculties of reason, represent to ourselves as ***connected*** through mere natural causes and as adequate to the idea of the conceived final end. Thus the concept of the ***practical necessity*** of such an end through the application of our powers does not agree with the theoretical concept of the ***physical possibility*** of effecting it, if we connect with our freedom no other causality (of a means) than that of nature.

Consequently we must assume a moral world-cause (an author of the world) in order to set for ourselves a final end in accordance with the moral law; and as far as the latter is necessary, so far (i.e., in the same degree and on the same ground) is it also necessary to assume the former: namely that there is a God.[^**]

This proof, to which one can easily adapt the form of logical precision, {{ 425 }} does not want to say: it is just as necessary to assume the existence of God {{{ 451 }}} as to recognize the validity of the moral law; hence whoever cannot convince himself of the former may judge himself to be free of the obligations according to the latter. No! only the ***aiming at*** the final end to be effected in the world through the observance of the latter (a happiness of rational beings harmoniously coinciding with the observance of moral laws, as the highest worldly good) would then have to be given up. Every rational being would still have to recognize itself as strictly bound to the precept of morals; for the laws of it are formal and command unconditionally, without regard to ends (as the matter of willing). But the one requirement of the final end, as practical reason prescribes it to world-beings, is an irresistible end placed in them by their nature (as {{ 426 }} finite beings), which reason wants to know subjected only to the moral law ***as*** an inviolable ***condition***, or also made universal in accordance with it, and so makes the promotion of happiness in agreement with morality into the final end. To promote this, as far (as concerns the former) as is in our capacity, is commanded us by the moral law; whatever may be the outcome that this endeavor has. The fulfillment of duty consists in the form of the earnest will, not in the intermediate causes of success.

Suppose, then: a human being persuaded himself, moved partly by the weakness of all the so highly praised speculative arguments, partly by many irregularities occurring to him in nature and the moral world, of the proposition that there is no God; then he would yet in his own eyes be a worthless person if on that account he were willing to hold the laws of duty to be merely imagined, invalid, non-obligatory and to resolve to transgress them without scruple. Such a one would also, even afterward, if he could subsequently convince himself of what he had at first doubted, yet always remain, with that manner of thinking, a worthless person: even if he fulfilled his duty, but out of fear, or out of a reward-seeking intention, without {{{ 452 }}} a duty-revering disposition, as punctually in effect as it ever {{ 427 }} might be demanded. Conversely, if he observes it as a believer sincerely and unselfishly according to his consciousness and nevertheless, as often as he sets the case by way of an experiment that he could once be convinced that there is no God, immediately believed himself free of all moral obligation: then the inner moral disposition in him would yet be but poorly constituted.

We can therefore assume an upright man (such as, say, Spinoza) who holds himself firmly persuaded: that there is no God and (because with regard to the object of morality it comes out to the same consequence) also no future life; how will he judge his own inner determination of ends through the moral law, which he actively reveres? He demands from the observance of it no advantage for himself, neither in this nor in another world; unselfishly he rather wills only to establish the good, toward which that holy law gives all his powers their direction. But his endeavor is limited; and from nature he can indeed expect now and then a contingent accession, but never a lawful agreement occurring according to constant rules (just as his maxims inwardly are and must be) with the end which he yet feels himself bound and driven to effect. Deceit, violence, and envy will always be rife around him, even though {{ 428 }} he himself is honest, peaceable, and benevolent; and the righteous ones whom he still encounters outside himself will, regardless of all their worthiness to be happy, nevertheless be subjected by nature, which pays no heed to it, to all the evils of want, of diseases, and of untimely death, just like the rest of the animals of the earth, and will also always remain so, until a wide grave swallows them all together (honest or dishonest, it makes no difference here) and casts them, who could believe themselves to be the final end of creation, back into the abyss of the purposeless chaos of matter from which they had been drawn. — The end, then, which this well-disposed person had and was to have before his eyes in the observance of the moral laws, he would indeed have to give up as impossible; or, if he wants to remain attached, also herein, to the call of his moral inner vocation and not to weaken the respect which the moral law immediately instills in him for obeying, through the nullity of the single idealistic final end adequate to its high demand (which cannot happen without a harm befalling the moral disposition): {{{ 453 }}} then he must, which he can also quite well do, since it is at least not in itself contradictory, in a practical respect, i.e., in order at least to make for himself a concept of the possibility of the final end morally prescribed to him, assume the existence of a ***moral*** author of the world, i.e., {{ 429 }} of God.

[^*]: I say expressly: ***under*** moral laws. It is not the human being ***in accordance with*** moral laws, i.e., one who conducts himself in conformity with them, that is the final end of creation. For with the latter expression we would say more than we know: namely that it stands in the power of an author of the world to make the human being conduct himself at all times conformably to the moral laws; which presupposes a concept of freedom and of nature (of which latter alone one can think an external author) that would have to contain an insight into the supersensible substrate of nature and the identity of it with that which makes causality through freedom possible in the world—an insight which goes far beyond our rational insight. Only of the ***human being under moral laws*** can we, without overstepping the bounds of our insight, say: his existence constitutes the final end of the world. This also agrees perfectly with the judgment of human reason reflecting morally about the course of the world. We believe we perceive the traces of a wise relation to ends even in evil, if we only see that the wicked malefactor does not die before he has suffered the well-deserved punishment of his misdeeds. According to our concepts of free causality, good or evil conduct depends on us; but the highest wisdom of the world-government we set in this, that the occasion for the former, but for both the outcome according to moral laws, is ordained. In the latter properly consists the honor of God, which is therefore not unfittingly called by theologians the ultimate end of creation. — It is still to be remarked that by the word creation, when we make use of it, we understand nothing other than what has been said here, namely the cause of the ***existence*** of a ***world***, or of the things in it (the substances); as the proper concept of this word also brings with it (_actuatio substantiae est creatio_): which therefore does not already carry with it the presupposition of a freely acting, consequently intelligent cause (whose existence we want first to prove).
[^**]: This moral argument is not supposed to provide any ***objectively*** valid proof of the existence of God, not to prove to the doubting believer that there is a God; but rather that, if he wants to think morally consistently, he ***must take up*** the assumption of this proposition among the maxims of his practical reason. — Nor is it thereby supposed to be said: it is ***for morality*** necessary to assume the happiness of all rational world-beings in proportion to their morality; but rather: it is necessary ***through*** it. Hence it is an argument sufficient ***subjectively***, for moral beings.
