---
position: 10
label: "Book X"
depth: 0
---
## BOOK X.

## THE ARGUMENT.

Mans transgression known, the guardian angels forsake Paradise, and return up to Heaven to approve their vigilance, and are approv'd, God declaring that the entrance of *Satan* could not be by them prevented. He sends his Son to judge the transgressors, who descends and gives sentence accordingly; then in pity cloaths them both, and reascends. *Sin* and *Death* sitting till then at the gates of Hell, by wondrous sympathie feeling the success of *Satan* in this new world, and the sin by man there committed, resolve to sit no longer confin'd in Hell, but to follow *Satan* their sire up to the place of man: to make the way easier from Hell to this world to and fro, they pave a broad highway or bridge over *Chaos,* according to the track that *Satan* first made; then preparing for earth, they meet him proud of his success returning to Hell; their mutual gratulation. *Satan* arrives at *Pandemonium,* in full of assembly relates with boasting his success against man; instead of applause is entertained with a general hiss by all his audience, transform'd with himself also suddenly into serpents, according to his doom giv'n in Paradise; then deluded with a shew of the forbidden tree springing up before them, they greedily reaching to take of the fruit, chew dust and bitter ashes. The proceedings of *Sin* and *Death;* God foretels the final victory of his Son over them, and the renewing of all things; but for the present commands his angels to make several alterations in the heavens and elements. *Adam* more and more perceiving his fall'n condition heavily bewailes, rejects the condolement of *Eve;* she persists and at length appeases him: then to evade the curse likely to fall on their offspring, proposes to *Adam* violent ways which he approves not, but conceiving better hope, puts her in mind of the late promise made them, that her seed should be reveng'd on the serpent, and exhorts her with him to seek peace of the offended deity, by repentance and supplication.

Meanwhile the heinous and despiteful act
Of *Satan* done in Paradise, and how
He in the serpent, had perverted *Eve,*
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in heav'n; for what can scape the eye
Of God all-seeing, or deceive his heart
Omniscient, who in all things wise and just,
Hinder'd not *Satan* to attempt the mind
Of man, with strength entire, and free will arm'd,
Complete to have discover'd and repuls'd
Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remember'd
The high injunction not to taste that fruit,
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,
Incurr'd, what could they less, the penaltie,
And manifold in sin, deserv'd to fall.
Up into heav'n from Paradise in haste
Th' angelic guards ascended, mute and sad
For man, for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondring how the subtle fiend had stol'n
Entrance unseen. soon as th' unwelcome news
From earth arriv'd at Heaven gate, displeas'd
All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare
That time celestial visages, yet mixt
With pitie, violated not their bliss.
About the new-arriv'd, in multitudes
Th' ethereal people ran, to hear and know
How all befell: they towards the throne supreme
Accountable made haste to make appear
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance,
And easily approv'd; when the most High
Eternal Father from his secret cloud,
Amidst in thunder utter'd thus his voice.

Assembl'd angels, and ye Powers return'd
From unsuccessful charge, be not dismaid,
Nor troubl'd at these tidings from the earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent,
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this tempter cross'd the gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail and speed
On his bad errand, man should be seduc't
And flatter'd out of all, believing lies
Against his maker; no decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free will, to her own inclining left
In even scale. but fall'n he is, and now
What rests but that the mortal sentence pass
On his transgression Death denounc't that day,
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he fear'd,
By some immediate stroak; but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bountie scorn'd.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee
Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferr'd
All judgement whether in heav'n, or earth, or Hell.
Easie it might be seen that I intend
Mercie collegue with justice, sending thee
Mans friend, his Mediator, his design'd
Both ransom and Redeemer voluntarie,
And destin'd man himself to judge man fall'n.

So spake the Father, and unfoulding bright
Toward the right hand his glorie, on the Son
Blaz'd forth unclouded deitie; he full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Express'd, and thus divinely answer'd milde.

Father Eternal, thine is to decree,
Mine both in heav'n and earth to do thy will
Supreme, that thou in me thy Son belov'd
Mayst ever rest well pleas'd. I go to judge
On earth these thy transgressors, but thou knowst,
Whoever judg'd, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be, for so I undertook
Before thee; and not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me deriv'd yet I shall temper so
Justice with mercie, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor train, where none
Are to behold the judgment, but the judg'd,
Those two; the third best absent is condemn'd,
Convict by flight, and rebel to all law
Conviction to the serpent none belongs.

Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose
Of high collateral glorie: him Thrones and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant
Accompanied to Heaven gate, from whence
*Eden* and all the coast in prospect lay.
Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes wing'd.
Now was the sun in western cadence low
From noon, and gentle aires due at their hour
To fan the earth now wak'd, and usher in
The eevning coole when he from wrauth more coole
Came the mild judge and intercessor both
To sentence man: the voice of God they heard
Now walking in the garden, by soft windes
Brought to their ears, while day declin'd, they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest trees, both man and wife, till God
Approaching, thus to *Adam* call'd aloud.

Where art thou *Adam,* wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off? I miss thee here.
Not pleas'd, thus entertaind with solitude,
Where obvious dutie erewhile appear'd unsought:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains? come forth.
He came, and with him *Eve,* more loath, though first
To offend, discount'nanc'd both, and discompos'd;
Love was not in their looks, either to God
Or to each other, but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacie, and hate, and guile.
Whence *Adam* faultring long, thus answer'd brief.

I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice
Affraid, being naked, hid my self. to whom
The gracious judge without revile repli'd.

My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not fear'd,
But still rejoyc't, how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who
Hath told thee? hast thou eaten of the tree
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat?

To whom thus *Adam* sore beset repli'd.
O heav'n! in evil strait this day I stand
Before my judge, either to undergoe
My self the total crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life;
Whose failing, while her faith to me remaines,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint; but strict necessitie
Subdues me; and calamitous constraint
Least on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolv'd; though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.
This woman whom thou mad'st to be my help,
And gav'st me as thy perfet gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in it self,
Her doing seem'd to justifie the deed;
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

To whom the sovran Presence thus repli'd.
Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey
Before his voice, or was she made thy guide,
Superior, or but equal, that to her
Thou did'st resigne thy manhood, and the place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excell'd
Hers in all real dignitie: adornd
She was indeed, and lovely to attract
Thy love, not thy subjection, and her gifts
Were such as under government well seem'd,
Unseemly to bear rule, which was thy part
And person, had'st thou known thy self aright.

So having said, he thus to *Eve* in few:
Say woman, what is this which thou hast done?

To whom sad *Eve* with shame nigh overwhelm'd,
Confessing soon, yet not before her judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abash'd repli'd.

The serpent me beguil'd and I did eat.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To judgement he proceeded on th' accus'd
Serpent though brute, unable to transfer
The guilt on him who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his creation; justly then accurst,
As vitiated in nature: more to know
Concern'd not man (since he no further knew)
Nor alter'd his offence; yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom apply'd,
Though in mysterious terms, judg'd as then best:
And on the serpent thus his curse let fall.

Because thou hast done this, thou art accurst
Above all cattle, each beast of the field;
Upon thy belly groveling thou shalt go,
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life.
Between thee and the woman I will put
Enmitie, and between thine and her seed;
Her seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.

So spake this oracle, then verifi'd
When *Jesus* son of *Mary* second *Eve,*
Saw Satan fall like lightning down from heav'n,
Prince of the aire; then rising from his Grave
Spoil'd principalities and Powers, triumph'd
In open shew, and with ascension bright
Captivity led captive through the aire,
The realm it self of Satan long usurpt,
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet;
Even he who now foretold his fatal bruise,
And to the woman thus his sentence turn'd.

Thy sorrow I will greatly multiplie
By thy conception; children thou shalt bring
In sorrow forth, and to thy husband's will
Thine shall submit, he over thee shall rule.

On *Adam* last thus judgement he pronounc'd.
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife,
And eaten of the tree concerning which
I charg'd thee, saying: thou shalt not eat thereof,
Curs'd is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow
Shalt eat thereof all the days of thy life;
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid, and thou shalt eat th' herb of th' field,
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,
Till thou return unto the ground, for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth,
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return.

So judg'd he man, both judge and Saviour scent,
And th' instant stroke of Death denounc't that day
Remov'd far off, then pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the aire, that now
Must suffer change, disdain'd not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume,
As when he wash'd his servants feet so now
As Father of his familie he clad
Their nakedness with skins of beasts, or slain,
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid;
And thought not much to cloath his enemies:
Nor he their outward only with the skins
Of beasts, but inward nakedness, much more
Opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness,
Arraying cover'd from his fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returnd,
Into his blissful bosom reassum'd
In glory as of old, to him appeas'd
All, though all-knowing, what had past with man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Meanwhile ere thus was sin'd and judg'd on earth,
Within the gates of Hell sate Sin and Death,
In counterview within the gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into *Chaos,* since the fiend pass'd through,
Sin opening, who thus now to Death began.

O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idlely, while Satan our great author thrives
In other worlds, and happier seat provides
For us his offspring dear? it cannot be
But that success attends him; if mishap,
Ere this he had return'd, with fury driv'n
By his avengers, since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and dominion giv'n me large
Beyond this deep; whatever drawes me on,
Or sympathie, or som connatural force
Powerful at greatest distance to unite
With secret amity things of like kinde
By secretest conveyance. thou my shade
Inseparable must with me along:
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But least the difficultie of passing back
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf
Impassable, impervious, let us try
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this maine from Hell to that new world
Where Satan now prevailes, a monument
Of merit high to all th' infernal host,
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse,
Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead.
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
By this new felt attraction and instinct.

Whom thus the meager shadow answerd soon.
Go whither fate and inclination strong
Leads thee, I shall not lag behind, nor err
The way, thou leading, such a scent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste
The savour of Death from all things there that live:
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid,

So saying, with delight he snuff'd the smell
Of mortal change on earth. as when a flock
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote,
Against the day of battel, to a field,
Where armies lie encampt, come flying, lur'd
With scent of living carcasses design'd
For death, the following day, in bloodie fight.
So scented the grim feature, and upturn'd
His nostril wide into the murkie air,
Sagacious of his quarry from so far.
Then both from out Hell gates into the waste
Wide anarchie of *Chaos* damp and dark
Flew divers, and with power (their power was great)
Hovering upon the waters; what they met
Solid or slimie, as in raging sea
Tost up and down, together crowded drove
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell.
As when two polar winds blowing adverse
Upon the *Cronian* sea, together drive
Mountains of ice, that stop th' imagin'd way
Beyond *Petsora* eastward, to the rich
*Cathaian* coast. the aggregated soyle
Death with his mace petrific, cold and dry,
As with a trident smote, and fix't as firm
As *Delos* floating once; the rest his look
Bound with *Gorgonian* rigor not to move,
And with *Asphaltic* slime, broad as the gate,
Deep to the roots of Hell the gather'd beach
They fasten'd, and the mole immense wraught on
Over the foaming deep high archt, a bridge
Of length prodigious joying to the wall
Immovable of this now fenceless world
Forfeit to Death from hence a passage broad,
Smooth, easie, inoffensive down to Hell.
So, if great thing to small may be compar'd,
*Xerxes;* the liberty of *Greece* to yoke,
From *Susa* his *Momronian* palace high
Came to the sea, and over *Hellespont*
Bridging his way *Europe* with *Asia* joyn'd,
And scourg'd with many a stroak th' indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wondrous art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendent rock
Over the vext abyss, following the track
Of *Satan,* to the self same place where he
First lighted from his wing, and landed safe
From out of *Chaos* to the out side bare
Of this round world: with pinns of adamant
And chains they made all fast, too fast they made
And durable; and now in little space
The confines met of empyrean heav'n
And of this world, and on the left hand Hell
With long reach interpos'd; three sev'ral ways
In sight, to each of these three places led.
And now their way to earth they had descri'd,
To Paradise first tending; when behold
*Satan* in likeness of all angel bright
Betwixt the *Centaure* and the *Scorpion* stearing
His *Zenith,* while the sun in *Aries* rose:
Disguis'd he came, but those his children dear
Their parent soon discern'd, though in disguise.
He after *Eve* seduc't, unminded slunk
Into the wood fast by, and changing shape
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act
By *Eve,* though all unweeting, seconded
Upon her husband, saw their shame that sought
Vain covertures; but when he saw descend
The Son of God to judge them terrifi'd
He fled, not hoping to escape, but shun
The present, fearing guiltie what his wrauth
Might suddenly inflict; that past, return'd
By Night, and listening where the hapless paire
Sate in their sad discourse, and various plaint,
Thence gatherd his own doom, which understood
Not instant, but of future time. with joy
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now return'd,
And at the brink of *Chaos,* neer the foot
Of this new wondrous pontifice, unhop't
Met who to meet him came, his offspring dear.
Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight
Of that stupendious bridge his joy encreas'd.
Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair
enchanting daughter, thus the silence broke.

O parent, these are thy magnific deeds,
Thy trophies, which thou view'st as not thine own,
Thou art their author and prime architect:
For I no sooner in my heart divin'd,
My heart, which by a secret harmonie
Still moves with thine, join'd in connexion sweet,
That thou on earth hadst prosper'd, which thy looks
Now also evidence, but straight I felt
Though distant from thee worlds between, yet felt
That I must after thee with this thy Son;
Such fatal consequence unites us three:
Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable gulf obscure
Detain from following thy illustrious track.
Thou hast achiev'd our liberty, confin'd
Within Hell gates till now, thou us empower'd
To fortifie thus far, and overlay
With this portentous bridge the dark abyss.
Thine now is all this world, thy vertue hath won
What thy hands builded not, thy wisdom gain'd
With odds what warr hath lost, and fully aveng'd
Our foil in heav'n; here thou shalt monarch reign,
There didst not; there let him still victor sway,
As battel hath adjudg'd, from this new world
Retiring, by his own doom alienated,
And henceforth monarchie with thee divide
Of all things parted by th' empyreal bounds,
His quadrature, from thy orbicular world,
Or try thee now more dang'rous to his throne.

Whom thus the prince of darkness answerd glad.
Fair daughter, and thou Son and grandchild both,
High proof ye now have giv'n to be the race
Of *Satan* (for I glorie in the name,
Antagonist of heav'ns almightie king)
Amply have merited of me, of all
Th' infernal empire, that so neer heav'ns door
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
Mine with this glorious work, and made one realm
Hell and this world, one realm, one continent
Of easie thorough-fare. therefore while I
Descend through darkness, on your rode with ease
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
With these successes, and with them rejoyce,
You two this way, among these numerous orbs
All yours, right down to Paradise descend;
There dwell and reign in bliss, thence on the earth
Dominion exercise and in the aire,
Chiefly on man, sole Lord of all declar'd,
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.
My substitutes I send ye, and create
Plenipotent on earth, of matchless might
Issuing from me: on your joynt vigor now
My hold of this new kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death expos'd by my exploit.
If your joynt power prevailes, th' affairs of Hell
No detriment need feare, go and be strong.

So saying he dismiss'd them, they with speed
Their course through thickest constellations held
Spreading their bane; the blasted starrs lookt wan,
And planets, planet-strook, real eclipse
Then sufferd. th' other way *Satan* went down
The causey to Hell gate; on either side
Disparted *Chaos* over built exclaimd,
And with rebounding surge the barrs assaild,
That scorn'd his indignation: through the gate,
Wide open and unguarded, *Satan* pass'd,
And all about found desolate; for those
Appointed to sit there, had left their charge,
Flown to the upper world; the rest were all
Far to the inland retir'd, about the walls
Of *Pandaemonium,* city and proud seate
Of *Lucifer,* so by allusion call'd,
Of that bright starr to *Satan* paragon'd.
There kept their watch the legions, while the grand
In council sate, sollicitous what chance
Might intercept their emperour scent, so he
Departing gave command, and they observ'd.
As when the *Tartar* from his *Russian* foe
By *Astracan* over the snowie plaines
Retires, or *Bactrian* Sophi from the horns
Of *Turkish* crescent, leaves all waste beyond
The realm of *Aladule,* in his retreat
To *Tauris* or *Casbeen.* so these the late
Heav'n-banisht host, left desert utmost Hell
Many a dark league, reduc't in careful watch
Round their metropolis, and now expecting
Each hour their great adventurer from the search
Of foreign worlds: he through the midst unmarked,
In shew plebeian angel militant
Of lowest order, past; and from the door
Of that *Plutonian* hall, invisible
Ascended his high throne, which under state
Of richest texture spred, at th' upper end
Was plac't in regal lustre. down a while
He sate, and round about him saw unseen:
At last as from a cloud his fulgent head
And shape starr bright appear'd, or brighter, clad
With what permissive glory since his fall
Was left him, or false glitter: all amaz'd
At that so sudden blaze the *Stygian* throng
Bent their aspect, and whom they wish'd beheld,
Their mighty chief returnd: loud was th' acclaime:
Forth rush'd in haste the great consulting peers,
Rais'd from their dark *Divan,* and with like joy
Congratulant approach'd him, who with hand
Silence, and with these words attention won.

Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Vertues, Powers,
For in possession such, not only of right,
I call ye and declare ye now, returnd
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
Triumphant out of this infernal pit
Abominable, accurst, the house of woe,
And dungeon of our tyrant: now possess,
As lords, a spacious world, to our native Heaven
Little inferiour, by my adventure hard
With peril great achiev'd. long were to tell
What I have don, what sufferd, with what pain
Voyag'd th' unreal, vast, unbounded deep
Of horrible confusion, over which
By Sin and Death a broad way now is pav'd
To expedite your glorious march; but I
Toild out my uncouth passage, forc't to ride
Th' untraceable abysse, plung'd in the womb
Of unoriginal *Night* and *Chaos* wilde,
That jealous of their secrets fiercely oppos'd
My journey strange, with clamorous uproar
Protesting fate supreame; thence how I found
The new created world, which same in heav'n
Long had foretold, a fabric wonderful
Of absolute perfection, therein man
Plac't in a Paradise, by our exile
Made happy: him by fraud I have seduc'd
From his Creator, and the more to increase
Your wonder, with all apple; he thereat
Offended, worth your laughter, hath giv'n up
Both his beloved man and all his world,
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,
Without our hazard, labour, or alarm,
To range in, and to dwell, and over man
To rule, as over all he should have rul'd.
True is, me also he hath judg'd, or rather
Me not, but the brute serpent in whose shape
Man I deceived: that which to me belongs,
Is enmity, which he will put between
Me and mankinde; I am to bruise his heel;
His seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:
A world who would not purchase with a bruise,
Or much more grievous pain? ye have th' account
Of my performance: what remains, ye Gods,
But up and enter now into full bliss.

So having said, a while he stood, expecting
Their universal shout and high applause
To fill his eare, when contrary he hears
On all sides, from innumerable tongues
A dismal universal hiss, the sound
Of public scorn; he wonderd, but not long
Had leisure, wondring at himself now more;
His visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare,
His armes clung to his ribs, his legs entwining
Each other, till supplanted down he fell
A monstrous serpent on his belly prone,
Reluctant, but in vaine, a greater power
Now rul'd him, punish'd in the shape he sin'd,
According to his doom: he would have spoke,
But hiss for hiss returnd with forked tongue
To forked tongue, for now were all transform'd
Alike, to serpents all as accessories
To his bold riot: dreadful was the din
Of hissing through the hall, thick swarming now
With complicated monsters head and tail,
Scorpion and asp, and *Amphisbaena* dire,
*Cerastes* hornd, *Hydrus,* and *Ellops* drear,
And *Dipsas* (not so thick swarm'd once the soil
Bedropt with blood of *Gorgon,* or the isle
*Ophiusa*) but still greatest he the midst,
Now dragon grown, larger then whom the sun
Engender'd in the *Pythian* vale on slime,
Huge *Python,* and his power no less he seem'd
Above the rest still to retain; they all
Him follow'd issuing forth to th' open field,
Where all yet left of that revolted rout
Heav'n-fall'n, in station stood or just array,
Sublime with expectation when to see
In triumph issuing forth their glorious chief;
They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd
Of ugly serpents; horror on them fell,
And horrid sympathie; for what they saw,
They felt themselvs now changing; down their arms,
Down fell both spear and shield, down they as fast,
And the dire hiss renew'd, and the dire form
Catcht by contagion, like in punishment,
As in their crime. thus was th' applause they meant,
Turn'd to exploding hiss, triumph to shame
Cast on themselves from their own mouths. there stood
A grove hard by, sprung up with this their change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Their penance, laden with fruit like that
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of *Eve*
Us'd by the tempter: on that prospect strange
Their earnest eyes they fix'd, imagining
For one forbidden tree a multitude
Now ris'n, to work them further woe or shame;
Yet parcht with scalding thurst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them scent, could not abstain,
But on thy rolled in heaps, and up the trees
Climbing, sat thicker then the snakie locks
That curl'd *Megaera:* greedily they pluck'd
The frutage fair to sight, like that which grew
Neer that bituminous lake where *Sodom* flam'd;
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
deceived; they fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with gust, instead of fruit
Chew'd bitter ashes, which th' offended taste
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assay'd,
Hunger and thirst constraining, drugg'd as oft,
With hatefullest disrelish writh'd their jaws
With soot and cinders fill'd; so oft they fell
Into the same illusion, not as man
Whom they triumph'd once lapst. thus were they plagu'd
And worn with famin, long and ceasless hiss,
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resum'd,
Yearly enjoin'd, some say, to undergo
This annual humbling certain number'd days,
To dash their pride, and joy for man seduc't.
However some tradition they dispers'd
Among the heathen of their purchase got,
And fabl'd how the serpent, whom they call'd
*Ophion* with *Eurynome,* the wide
Encroaching *Eve* perhaps, had first the rule
Of high *Olympus,* thence by *Saturn* driv'n
And *Ops,* ere yet *dictaen Jove* was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arriv'd, *Sin* there in power before,
Once actual, now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant; behind her *Death*
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale horse: to whom *Sin* thus began.

Second of *Satan* sprung, all conquering *Death,*
What thinkst thou of our empire now, though earn'd
With travail difficult, not better far
Then stil at hels dark threshold to have sate watch,
Unnam'd, undreaded, and thy self half starv'd?

Whom thus the Sin-born monster answerd soon.
To me, who with eternal famin pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven,
There best, where most with ravin I may meet;
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this maw, this vast unhide-bound corps.

To whom th' incestuous mother thus repli'd.
Thou therefore on these herbs, and fruits, and flours
Feed first, on each beast next, and fish, and fowle,
No homely morsels, and whatever thing
The sithe of time mowes down, devour unspar'd,
Till I in man residing through the race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect,
And season him thy last and sweetest prey.

This said, they both betook them several ways,
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for destruction to mature
Sooner or later; which th' almightie seeing,
From his transcendent seat the Saints among,
To those bright orders utter'd thus his voice.

See with what heat these dogs of Hell advance
To waste and havoc yonder world, which I
So fair and good created, and had still
Kept in that state, had not the folly of man
Let in these wastful Furies, who impute
Folly to me, so doth the prince of Hell
And his adherents, that with so much ease
I suffer them to enter and possess
A place so heav'nly, and conniving seem
To gratifie my scornful enemies,
That laugh, as if transported with some fit
Of passion, I to them had quitted all,
At random yielded up to their misrule;
And know not that I call'd and drew them thither
My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth
Which man's polluting Sin with taint hath shed
On what was pure, till cramm'd and gorg'd, nigh burst
With suckt and glutted offal, at one sling
Of thy victorious arm, well-pleasing Son,
Both *Sin,* and *Death,* and yawning *Grave* at last
Through *Chaos* hurl'd, obstruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and seal up his ravenous jawes.
Then heav'n and earth renew'd shall be made pure
To sanctitie that shall receive no staine:
Till then the curse pronounc't on both precedes.

He ended, and the heav'nly audience loud
Sung *Halleluia,* as the sound of seas,
Through multitude that sung: just are thy ways,
Righteous are thy decrees on all thy works;
Who can extenuate thee? next, to the Son,
Destin'd restorer of mankind, by whom
New heav'n and earth shall to the ages rise,
Or down from heav'n descend. such was their song,
While the Creator calling forth by name
His mightie angels gave them several charge,
As sorted best with present things. the sun
Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
As might affect the earth with cold and heat
Scarce tollerable, and from the north to call
Decrepit winter, from the south to bring
Solstitial summers heat. to the blanc moone
Her office they prescrib'd, to th' other five
Their planetarie motions and aspects
In *sextile, square,* and *Trine,* and *Opposite,*
Of noxious efficacie, and when to joyne
In synod unbenigne, and taught the fixt
Their influence malignant when to showre,
Which of them rising with the sun, or falling,
Should prove tempestuous: to the winds they set
Their corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, aire, and shore, the thunder when to rowle
With terror through the dark aereal hall.
Some say he bid his angels turne ascanse
The poles of earth twice ten degrees and more
From the suns axle; they with labour push'd
Oblique the centric globe: som say the sun
Was bid turn reines from th' equinoctial rode
Like distant breadth to *Taurus* with the seven
*Atlantick* sisters, and the *Spartan* twins
Up to the *Tropic* Crab; thence down amain
By *Leo* and the *Virgin* and the *Scales,*
A deep as *Capricorne,* to bring in change
Of seasons to each clime; else had the spring
Perpetual smil'd on earth with vernant flours,
Equal in days and nights, except to those
Beyond the polar circles; to them day
Had unbenighted shone, while the low sun
To recompence his distance, in their sight
Had rounded still th' *Horizon,* and not known
Or east or west, which had forbid the snow
From cold *Estotiland,* and south as far
Beneath *Magellan.* at that tasted fruit
The sun, as from *Thyestean* banquet, turn'd
His course intended; else how had the world
Inhabited, though sinless, more then now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heate?
These changes in the heav'ns, though slow, produc'd
Like change on sea and land, sidereal blast,
Vapour, and mist, and exhalation hot,
Corrupt and pestilent: now from the north
Of *Normbega,* and the *Samoed* shore
Bursting their brazen dungeon, arm'd with ice
And snow and hail and stormy gust and flaw,
*Boreas* and *Caecias* and *Argestes* loud
And *Thrascias* rend the woods and seas upturn;
With adverse blast up-turns them from the south
*Notus* and *Afer* black with thundrous clouds
From *Serraliona;* thwart of these as fierce
Forth rush the *Levant* and the *Ponent* windes
*Eurus* and *Zephir* with their lateral noise,
*Sirocco,* and *Libecchio,* thus began
Outrage from lifeless things; but discord first
Daughter of Sin, among th' irrational,
Death introduc'd through fierce antipathy:
Beast now with beast gan war, and fowle with fowle,
And fish with fish; to graze the herb all leaving,
Devour'd each other; nor stood much in awe
Of man, but fled him, or with count'nance grim
Glar'd on him passing: these were from without
The growing miseries, which *Adam* saw
Alreadie in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandon'd, but worse felt within,
And in a troubl'd sea of passion tost,
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint.

O miserable of happy! is this the end
Of this new glorious world, and me so late
The glory of that glory, who now become
Accurst of blessed, hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my height
Of happiness: yet well, if here would end
The miserie, I deserv'd it, and would bear
My own deservings; but this will nor serve;
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated curse. O voice once heard
Delightfully, *encrease and multiply,*
Now death to heare! for what can I encrease
Or multiplie, but curses on my head?
Who of all ages to succeed, but feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My head, ill fare our ancestor impure,
For this we may thank *Adam;* but his thanks
Shall be the execration; so besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me
Shall with a fierce reflux on me redound,
On me as on their natural center light
Heavie, though in their place. O fleeting joyes
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, maker, from my clay
To mould me man, did I sollicite thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious garden? as my will
Concurd not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust,
Desirous to resigne, and render back
All I receav'd, unable to performe
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not. to the loss of that,
Sufficient penaltie, why hast thou added
The sense of endless woes? inexplicable
Thy justice seems; yet to say truth, too late,
I thus contest; then should have been refusd
Those terms whatever, when they were propos'd:
Thou didst accept them; wilt thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil the conditions? and though God
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son
Prove disobedient, and reprov'd, retort,
Wherefore didst thou beget me? I sought it not
Wouldst thou admit for his contempt of thee
That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,
But natural necessity begot.
God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
To serve him, thy reward was of his grace,
Thy punishment then justly is at his will.
Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair,
That dust I am, and shall to dust return:
O welcom hour whenever! why delayes
His hand to execute what his decree
Fixd on this day? why do I overlive,
Why am I mockt with death, and length'nd out
To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet
Mortalitie my sentence, and be earth,
Insensible, how glad would lay me down
As in my mothers lap? there I should test
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more
Would thunder in my ears, no fear of worse
To me and to my offspring would torment me
With cruel expectation. yet one doubt
Pursues me still, least all I cannot die,
Least that pure breath of life, the spirit of man
Which God inspir'd, cannot together perish
With this corporeal clod; then in the Grave,
Or in some other dismal place who knows
But I shall die a living Death? O thought
Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath
Of life that sinn'd; what dies but what had life
And sin? the bodie properly hath neither.
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt since human reach no further knows,
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrauth also? be it, man is not so,
But mortal doom'd. how can he exercise
Wrath without end on man whom Death must end?
Can he make deathless Death? that were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held, as argument
Of weakness, not of power. will he, draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite
In punish'd man, to satisfie his rigour
Satisfi'd never; that were to extend
His sentence beyond dust and natures law,
By which all causes else according still
To the reception of their matter act,
Not to th' extent of their own spheare. but say
That Death be not one stroak, as I suppos'd,
Bereaving sense, but endless miserie
From this day onward, which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me, and so last
To perpetuitie; ay me, that fear
Comes thundring back with dreadful revolution
On my defensless head; both Death and I
Am sound Eternal, and incorporate both,
Nor I on my part single, in me all
Posteritie stands curst: fair patrimonie
That I must leave ye, sons; O were I able
To waste it all my self, and leave ye none!
So disinherited how would ye bless
Me now your curse! ah, why should all mankind
For one man's fault thus guiltless be condemn'd,
If guiltless? but from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt, both mind and will deprav'd,
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me? how can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God? him after all disputes
Forc't I absolve: all my evasions vain,
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On me, me only, as the source and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;
So might the wrauth. fond wish! couldst thou support
That burden heavier then the earth to bear
Then all the world much heavier, though divided
With that bad woman? thus what thou desir'st
And what thou fearst, alike destroyes all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future,
To *Satan* only like both crime and doom.
O conscience, into what abyss of fears
And horrors hast thou driv'n me; out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plung'd!

Thus *Adam* to himself lamented loud
Through the still Night, not now, as ere man fell,
Wholesome and cool, and mild, but with black air
Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom,
Which to his evil conscience represented
All things with double terror: on the ground
Outstretcht he lay, on the cold ground, and oft
Curs'd his creation, Death as oft accus'd
Of tardy execution, since denounc't
The day of his offence. why comes not Death,
Said he, with one thrice acceptable stroke
To end me? shall truth fail to keep her word,
Justice divine not hasten to be just?
But Death comes not at call, justice divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries.
O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales and bowers,
With other echo late I taught your shades
To answer, and resound far other song.
Whom thus afflicted when sad *Eve* beheld,
Desolate where she sate, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assay'd:
But her with stern regard he thus repell'd.

Out of my sight, thou serpent, that name best
Befits thee with him leagu'd, thy self as false
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and colour serpentine may shew
Thy inward fraud, to warn all creatures from thee
Henceforth; least that too heav'nly form, pretended
To hellish falsehood, snare them. but for thee
I had persisted happy, had not thy pride
And wandering vanitie, when lest was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdain'd
Not to be trusted, longing to be seen
Though by the devil himself, him overweening
To over-reach, but with the serpent meeting
Fool'd and beguil'd, by him thou, I by thee,
To trust thee from my side, imagin'd wise,
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults,
And understood not all was but a shew
Rather then solid vertu, all but a rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part sinister from me drawn,
Well if thrown out, as supernumerarie
To my just number found. O why did God,
Creator wise, that peopled highest heav'n
With spirits masculine, create at last
This novelty on earth, this fair defect
Of nature, and not fill the world at once
With men as angels without feminine,
Or find some other way to generate
Mankind? this mischief had not then befall'n,
And more that shall befall, innumerable
Disturbances on earth through female snares,
And straight conjunction with this sex: for either
He never shall find out fit mate, but such
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake,
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gain'd
By a far worse, or if she love, withheld
By parents, or his happiest choice too late
Shall meet, alreadie linkt and wedlock-bound
To a fell adversary, his hate or shame:
Which infinite calamity shall cause
To human life, and household peace confound.

He added not, and from her turn'd, but *Eve*
Not so repuls'd, with tears that ceas'd not flowing,
And tresses all disorderd, at his feet
Fell humble, and imbracing them, besought
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.

Forsake me not thus, *Adam,* witness heav'n
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended,
Unhappily deceived; thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel in this uttermost distress,
My only strength and stay: forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarse one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace, both joyning,
As joyn'd in injuries, one enmitie
Against a foe by doom express assign'd us,
That cruel serpent: on me exercise not
Thy hatred for this miserie befall'n,
On me alreadie lost, me then thy self
More miserable; both have sin'd, but thou
Against God only, I against God and thee,
And to the place of judgment will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven, that all
The sentence from thy head remov'd may ligh.
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe,
Me me only just object of his ire.

She ended weeping, and her lowlie plight,
Immoveable till peace obtain'd from fault
Acknowledg'd and deplor'd, in *Adam* wraught
Commiseration; soon his heart relented
Towards her, his life so late and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress,
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking,
His counsel whom she had displeas'd, his aide;
As one disarm'd, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words uprais'd her soon.

Unwarie, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou knowst not, who desir'st
The punishment all on thy self; alas,
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustaine
His full wrauth whose thou feelst as yet lest part,
And my displeasure bearst so ill. if prayers
Could alter high decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited,
Thy frailtie and infirmer sex forgiv'n,
To me committed and by me expos'd.
But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blam'd enough elsewhere, but strive
In offices of love, how we may light'n
Each others burden in our share of woe;
Since this day's Death denounc't, if ought I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slow pac't evil,
A long days dying to augment our pain,
And to our seed (O hapless seed!) deriv'd.

To whom thus *Eve,* recovering heart, repli'd.
*Adam,* by sad experiment I know
How little weight my words with thee can finde,
Found so erroneous, thence by just event
Found so unfortunate; nevertheless,
Restor'd by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet brest are ris'n,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,
Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devour'd
By Death at last, and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our loines to bring
Into this cursed world a woful race,
That after wretched life must be at last
Food for so foule a monster, in thy power
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, Childless remain:
So Death shall be deceived his glut, and with us two
Be forc'd to satisfie his rav'nous maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From loves due rites, nuptial imbraces sweet,
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire, which would be meserie
And torment less then none of what we dread,
Then both our selves and seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short,
Let us seek Death, or he not found, supply
With our own hands his office on our selves;
Why stand we longer shivering under feares,
That shew no end but Death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy.

She ended here, or vehement despair
Broke off the rest; so much of Death her thoughts
Had entertaind, as dyed her cheeks with pale.
But *Adam* with such counsel nothing sway'd,
To better hopes his more attentive mind
Labouring had rais'd, and thus to *Eve* repli'd.

*Eve,* thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee somthing more sublime
And excellent then what thy mind contemnes;
But self-destruction therefore saught, refutes
That excellence thought in thee, and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overlov'd.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of miserie, so thinking to evade
The penaltie pronounc't, doubt not but God
Hath wiselier arm'd his vengeful ire then so
To be forestall'd; much more I fear least Death
So snatcht will not exempt us from the pain
We are by doom to pay; rather such acts
Of contumacie will provoke the highest
To make death in us live: then let us seek
Some safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to mind with heed
Part of our sentence, that thy seed shall bruise
The serpents head; piteous amends, unless
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe
*Satan,* who in the serpent hath contriv'd
Against us this deceit: to crush his head
Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost
By death brought on our selves, or childless days
Resolv'd, as thou proposest; so our foe
Shall scape his punishment ordain'd, and we
Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mention'd then of violence
Against our selves, and wilful barrenness,
That cuts us off from hope, and savours only
Rancor and pride, impatience and despite,
Reluctance against God and his just yoke
Laid on our necks. remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard and judg'd
Without wrauth or reviling; we expected
Immediate dissolution, which we thought
Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee
Pains only in child-bearing were foretold,
And bringing forth, soon recompenc't with joy,
Fruit of thy womb: on me the curse aslope
Glanc'd on the ground, with labour I must earne
My bread; what harm? idleness had been worse;
My labour will sustain me; and least cold
Or heat should injure us, his timely care
Hath unbesought provided, and his hands
Cloath'd us unworthy, pitying while he judg'd;
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pitie incline,
And teach us further by what means to shun
Th' inclement seasons, rain, ice, hail and snow,
Which now the skie with various face begins
To shew us in this mountain, while the winds
Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks
Of these fair spreading trees; which bids us seek
Som better shroud, som better warmth to cherish
Our limbs benumm'd, ere this diurnal starr
Leave cold the Night, how we his gather'd beams
Reflected, may with matter sere foment,
Or by collision of two bodies grind
The air attrite to fire, as late the clouds
Justling or pusht with winds rude in their shock
Tine the slant lightning, whose thwart flame driv'n down
Kindles the gummy bark of fir or pine,
And sends a comfortable heat from far,
Which might supplie the sun: such fire to use,
And what may else be remedy or cure
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,
He will instruct us praying, and of grace
Beseeching him, so as we need not fear
To pass commodiously this life, sustain'd
By him with many comforts, till we end
In dust, our final rest and native home.
What better can we do, then to the place
Repairing where he judg'd us, prostrate fall
Before him reverent, and there confess
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the air
Frequenting, scent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek.
Undoubtedly he will relent and turn
From his displeasure; in whose look serene,
When angry most he seem'd and most severe,
What else but favor, grace, and mercie shone?

So spake our Father penitent, nor *Eve*
Felt less remorse: they forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judg'd them prostrate fell
Before him reverent, and both confess'd
Humbly their faults, and pardon beg'd, with tears
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the air
Frequenting, scent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeign'd, and humiliation meek.
