---
position: 11
label: "Book 11"
depth: 1
---
## BOOK XI.

## THE ARGUMENT.

The Son of God presents to his Father the prayers of our first parents now repenting, and intercedes for them: God accepts them, but declares that they must no longer abide in Paradise; sends *Michael* with a band of cherubim to dispossess them; but first to reveal to *Adam* future things: *Michaels* coming down. *Adam* shews to *Eve* certain ominous signs; he discerns *Michaels* approach, goes out to meet him: the angel denounces their departure. *Eve's* lamentation. *Adam* pleads, but submits: the angel leads him up to a high hill, sets before him in vision what shall happ'n till the flood.

THus they in lowliest plight repentant stood
Praying, for from the mercy-seat above
Prevenient grace descending had remov'd
The stony from their hearts, & made new flesh
Regenerate grow instead, that sighs now breath'd
Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer
Inspir'd, and wing'd for Heav'n with speedier flight
Than loudest oratory: yet their port
Not of mean suitors, nor important less
Seem'd their petition, then when th' ancient pair
In fables old, less ancient yet than these,
*Deucalion* and chaste *Pyrtha* to restore
The race of mankind drown'd, before the shrine
Of *Themis* stood devout. To Heav'n their prayers
Flew up, nor miss'd the way, by envious winds
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they pass'd
Dimensionless through Heav'nly doors; than clad
With incense, where the golden altar fum'd,
By their great Intercessor, came in sight
Before the Father's throne: them the glad Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.

See Father, what first fruits on earth are sprung
From thy implanted grace in man, these sighs
And prayers, which in this golden censer, mixt
With incense, I thy priest before thee bring,
Fruits of more pleasing savour from thy seed
Sown with contrition in his heart, than those
Which his own hand manuring all the trees
Of Paradise could have produc'd, ere fall'n
From innocence. Now therefore bend thine ear
To supplication, hear his sighs though mute;
Unskillful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him, me his advocate
And propitiation, all his works on me
Good or not good ingraft, my merit those
Shall perfect, and for these my death shall pay.
Accept me, and in me from these receive
The smell of peace toward mankind, let him live
Before thee reconcil'd, at least his days
Number'd, though sad, till death, his doom (which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse)
To better life shall yield him, where with me
All my redeem'd may dwell in joy and bliss,
Made one with me as I with thee am one.

To whom the Father, without cloud, serene.
All thy request for man, accepted Son,
Obtain, all thy request was my decree:
But longer in that Paradise to dwell,
The law I gave to nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal elements that know
No gross, no unharmonious mixture foule,
Eject him tainted now, and purge him off
As a distemper, gross to aire as gross,
And mortal food, as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by sin, that first
Distemperd all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted. I at first with two fair gifts
Created him endowd, with happiness
And immortality: that fondly lost,
This other serv'd but to eternize woe;
Till I provided death; so death becomes
His final remedy, and after life
Tri'd in sharp tribulation, and refin'd
By faith and faithful works, to second life,
Wak't in the renovation of the just,
Resignes him up with Heav'n and earth renewd.
But let us call to synod all the blest
Through Heav'ns wide bounds; from them I will not hide
My judgments, how with mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant angels late they saw;
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmd.

He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright minister that watch'd, hee blew
His trumpet, heard in *Oreb* since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general doom. Th' angelic blast
fill'd all the regions: from their blissful bowrs
Of *Amarantin* shade, fountain or spring,
By the waters of life, where ere they sate
In fellowships of joy: the sons of light
Hasted, resorting to the summons high,
And took their seats; till from his throne supreme
Th' Almighty thus pronounc'd his sovran will.

O sons, like one of us man is become
To know both good and evil, since his taste
Of that defended fruit; but let him boast
His knowledge of good lost, and evil got,
Happier, had it suffic'd him to have known
Good by it self, and evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
My motions in him, longer than they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain
Self-left. Lest therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the tree of life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the garden forth to till
The ground whence he was taken, fitter soil.

*Michael,* this my behest have thou in charge,
Take to thee from among the cherubim
Thy choice of flaming warriours, least the fiend
Or in behalf of man, or to invade
Vacant possession som new trouble raise:
Hast thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful pair,
From hallowd ground th' unholy, and denounce
To them and to their progeny from thence
Perpetual banishment. Yet lest they faint
At the sad sentence rigorously urg'd,
For I behold them softn'd and with tears
Bewailing their excess, all terror hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveale
To *Adam* what shall come in future days,
As I shall thee enlighten, intermix
My covenant in the womans seed renewd;
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace▪
And on the east side of the garden place,
Where entrance up from *Eden* easiest climbs,
Cherubic watch, and of a sword the flame
Wide waving, all approach far off to fright,
And guard all passage to the tree of life:
Least Paradise a receptacle prove
To spirits foule, and all my trees their prey,
With whose stol'n fruit man once more to delude.

He ceas'd; and th' archangelic power prepar'd
For swift descent, with him the cohort bright
Of watchful cherubim; four faces each
Had, like a double *Janus,* all their shape
Spangl'd with eyes more numerous than those
Of *Argus,* and more wakeful than to drowse,
Charm'd with *Arcadian* pipe, the pastoral reed
Of *Hermes,* or his opiate rod. Mean while
To resalute the world with sacred light
*Leucothea* wak'd, and with fresh dews imbalmd
The earth, when *Adam* and first matron *Eve*
Had ended now their orisons, and found
Strength added from above, new hope to spring
Out of despaire, joy, but with fear yet linkt;
Which thus to *Eve* his welcome words renewd.

*Eve,* easily may faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy, from Heav'n descends;
But that from us ought should ascend to Heav'n
So prevalent as to concerne the mind
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will prayer,
Or one short sigh of human breath, up-borne
Ev'n to the seat of God. For since I sought
By prayer th' offended deity to appease,
Kneel'd and before him humbl'd all my heart,
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his ear; perswasion in me grew
That I was heard with savour; peace returnd
Home to my brest, and to my memory
His promise, that thy seed shall bruise our foe;
Which then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live. Whence Hail to thee,
*Eve* rightly call'd, mother of all mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live, and all things live for man.

To whom thus *Eve* with sad demeanour meek.
Ill worthy I such title should belong
To me transgressour, who for thee ordain'd
A help, became thy snare; to me reproach
Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my judge,
That I who first brought death on all, am grac't
The sourse of life; next favourable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsaf'st,
Far other name deserving. But the field
To labour calls us now with sweat impos'd,
Though after sleepless night; for see the morn,
All unconcern'd with our unrest, begins
Her rosy progress smiling; let us forth,
I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoind
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,
What can be toilsom in these pleasant walks?
Here let us live, though in fall'n state, content.

So spake, so wish'd much-humbl•d *Eve,* but fate
Subscrib'd not; nature first gave signs, imprest
On bird, beast, aire, aire suddenly eclips'd
After short blush of morn; nigh in her sight
The bird of *jove,* stoopt from his airy tower,
Two birds of gayest plume before him drove:
Down from a hill the beast that reigns in woods,
First hunter then, pursu'd a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the forrest, hart and hind;
Direct to th' eastern gate was bent their flight.
*Adam* observ'd, and with his eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmov'd to *Eve* thus spake.

O *Eve,* some further change awaits us nigh,
Which Heav'n by these mute signs in nature shews
Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn
Us haply too secure of our discharge
From penalty, because from death releast
Some days; how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows, or more than this, that we are dust,
And thither must return and be no more.
Why else this double object in our sight
Of flight pursu'd in th' air and ore the ground
One way the self-same hour? Why in the east
Darkness ere days mid course, and morning light
More orient in yon western cloud that draws
O're the blew firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends, with somthing Heav'nly fraught.

He err'd not, for by this the Heav'nly bands
Down from a sky of jasper lighted now
In Paradise, and on a hill made halt,
A glorious apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimm'd *Adams* eye.
Not that more glorious, when the angels met
*Jacob* in *Mahanaim,* where he saw
The field pavilion'd with his guardians bright;
Nor that which on the flaming mount appear'd
In *Dothan,* cover'd with a camp of fire,
Against the *Syrian* king, who to surprize
One man, assassin-like had levied warr,
War unproclaim'd. The princely hierarch
In their bright stand, there left his powers to seise
Possession of the garden; hee alone,
To find where *Adam* shelter'd, took his way,
Not unperceav'd of *Adam,* who to *Eve,*
While the great visitant approach'd, thus spake.

*Eve,* now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determin, or impose
New laws to be observ'd; for I descry
From yonder blazing cloud that veils the hill
One of the Heav'nly host, and by his gate
None of the meanest, some great potentate
Or of the thrones above, such majesty
Invests him coming? Yet not terrible,
That I should fear, nor sociably mild,
As *raphael,* that I should much confide,
But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended; and th' arch-angel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape celestial, but as man
Clad to meet man; over his lucid arms
A military vest of purple flowd
Livelier than *Meliboean,* or the grain
Of *Sarra,* worn by kings and hero's old
In time of truce; *Iris* had dipt the woof;
His starry helm unbuckl'd shew'd him prime
In manhood where youth ended; by his side
As in a glistering *Zodiac* hung the sword,
Satans dire dread, and in his hand the spear.
*Adam* bow'd low, hee kingly from his state
Inclin'd not, but his coming thus declar'd.

*Adam,* Heav'ns high behest no preface needs:
Sufficient that thy prayers are heard, and death,
Then due by sentence when thou didst transgress,
Defeated of his seisure many days
Giv'n thee of grace, wherein thou may'st repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
Mayst cover: well may then thy Lord appeas'd
Redeem thee quite from deaths rapacious claime;
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not; to remove thee I am come,
And send thee from the garden forth to till
The ground whence thou wast tak'n, fitter soil.

He added not, for *Adam* at the news
Heart-strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound; *Eve,* who unseen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Discover'd soon the place of her retire.

O unexpected stroke, worse than of death!
Must I thus leave thee Paradise? Thus leave
Thee native soil, these happy walks and shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? Where I had hope to spend,
Quiet though sad, the respite of that day
That must be mortal to us both. O flowers,
That never will in other climate grow,
My early visitation, and my last
At eev'n, which I bred up with tender hand
From the first op'ning bud, and gave ye names,
Who now shall rear ye to the sun, or ranke
Your tribes, and water from th' ambrosial fount?
Thee lastly nuptial bowre, by me adorn'd
With what to sight or smell was sweet; from thee
How shall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower world, to this obscure
And wild, how shall we breath in other aire
Less pure, accustom'd to immortal fruits?

Whom thus the angel interrupted mild.
Lament not *Eve,* but patiently resigne
What justly thou hast lost; nor set thy heart,
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine;
Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes
Thy husband, him to follow thou art bound;
Where he abides, think there thy native soil.

*Adam* by this from the cold sudden damp
Recovering, and his scatterd spirits returnd.
To *Michael* thus his humble words address'd.

Celestial, whether among the thrones, or nam'd
Of them the highest, for such of shape may seem
Prince above princes, gently hast thou told
Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
And in performing end us; what besides
Of sorrow and dejection and despair
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our sweet
Recess, and only consolation left
Familiar to our eyes, all places else
Inhospitable appear and desolate,
Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer
Incessant I could hope to change the will
Of him who all things can, I would not cease
To weary him with my assiduous cries:
But prayer against his absolute decree
No more avails than breath against the wind,
Blown stifling back on him that breathes it forth:
Therefore to his great bidding I submit.
This most afflicts me, that departing hence,
As from his face I shall be hid, depriv'd
His blessed countenance; here I could frequent,
With worship, place by place where he voutsaf 'd
Presence divine, and to my sons relate;
On this mount he appear'd, under this tree
Stood visible, among these pines his voice
I heard, here with him at this fountain talk'd:
So many grateful altars I would rear
Of grassy turf, and pile up every stone
Of lustre from the brook, in memory,
Or monument to ages, and thereon
Offer sweet smelling gums and fruits and flowers:
In yonder nether world where shall I seek
His bright appearances, or foot step-trace?
For though I fled him angry, yet recall'd
To life prolongd and promisd race, I now
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts
Of glory, and far off his steps adore.

To whom thus *Michael* with regard benigne.
*Adam,* thou know'st Heav'n his, and all the earth.
Not this rock only; his omnipresence fills
Land, sea, and aire, and every kinde that lives,
Fomented by his virtual power and warmd:
All th' earth he gave thee to possess and rule,
No despicable gift; surmise not then
His presence to these narrow bounds confin'd
Of Paradise or *Eden:* this had been
Perhaps thy capital seat, from whence had spred
All generations, and had hither come
From all the ends of th' earth, to celebrate
And reverence thee their great progenitor.
But this praeeminence thou hast lost, brought down
To dwell on even ground now with thy sons:
Yet doubt not but in valley and in plain
God is as here, and will be found alike
Present, and of his presence many a signe
Still following thee, still compassing thee round
With goodness and paternal love, his face
Express, and of his steps the track divine.
Which that thou mayst beleeve, and be confirmd
Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent
To shew thee what shall come in future days
To thee and to thy ofspring; good with bad
Expect to hear, supernal grace contending
With sinfulness of men; thereby to learn
True patience, and to temper joy with fear
And pious sorrow, equally inured
By moderation either state to beare,
Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead
Safest thy life, and best prepar'd endure
Thy mortal passage when it comes. Ascend
This hill; let *Eve* (for I have drencht her eyes)
Here sleep below while thou to foresight wak'st,
As once thou slepst, while shee to life was formd.

To whom thus *Adam* gratefully repli'd.
Ascend, I follow thee, safe guide, the path
Thou lead'st me, and to the hand of Heav'n submit,
However chast'ning, to the evil turn
My obvious breast, arming to overcome
By suffering, and earn rest from labour won,
If so I may attain. So both ascend
In the visions of God: it was a hill
Of Paradise the highest, from whose top
The hemisphere of earth in cleerest ken
Stretcht out to the amplest reach of prospect lay.
Not higher that hill nor wider looking round,
Whereon for different cause the tempter set
Our second *Adam* in the wilderness,
To shew him all earths kingdoms and their glory.
His eye might there command wherever stood
City of old or modern fame, the seat
Of mightiest empire, from the destind walls
Of *Cambalu,* seat of *Cathaian Can*
And *Samarchand* by *Oxus, Temirs* throne,
To *Paquin* of *Sinaean* kings, and thence
To *Agra* and *Lahor* of great *Mogul*
Down to the golden *Chersonese,* or where
The *Persian* in *Ecbatan* sate, or since
In *Hispahan,* or where the *Russian Kfar*
In *Mosco,* or the sultan in *Bizance,*
*Turchestan*-born; nor could his eye not ken
Th' empire of *Negus* to his utmost port
*Ercoco* and the less *maritime* kings
*Mombaza,* and *Quiloa,* and *Melind,*
And *Sofala* thought *Ophir,* to the realm
Of *Congo,* and *Angola* farthest south;
Or thence from *Niger* flood to *Atlas* mount
The kingdoms of *Almansor, Fez* and *Sus,*
*Marocco* and *Algiers,* and *Tremisen;*
On *Europe* thence, and where *Rome* was to sway
The world: in Spirit perhaps he also saw
Rich *Mexico* the seat of *Motezume,*
And *Cusco* in *Peru,* the richer seat
Of *Atabalipa,* and yet unspoil'd
*Guiana,* whose great city *Geryons* sons
Call *El Dorado:* but to nobler sights
*Michael* from *Adams* eyes the filme remov'd
Which that false fruit that promis'd clearer sight
Had bred; then purg'd with euphrasy and rue
The visual nerve, for he had much to see;
And from the well of life three drops instill'd.
So deep the power of these ingredients pierc'd,
Eevn to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That *Adam* now enforc't to close his eyes,
Sunk down and all his spirits became intranst:
But him the gentle angel by the hand
Soon rais'd, and his attention thus recall'd.

*Adam,* now ope thine eyes, and first behold
Th' effects which thy original crime hath wrought
In some to spring from thee, who never touch'd
Th' excepted tree, nor with the snake conspir'd,
Nor sinn'd thy sin, yet from that derive
Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds.

His eyes he op'nd, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were sheaves
New reaped, the other part sheep-walks and folds;
Ith' midst an altar as the land-mark stood
Rustic, of grassy sward; thither anon
A sweaty reaper from his tillage brought
First fruits, the green ear, and the yellow sheaf,
Uncull'd, as came to hand; a shepherd next
More meek came with the firstlings of his flock
Choicest and best; then sacrificing, laid
The inwards and their fat, with incense strew'd,
On the cleft wood, and all due rites perform'd.
His offering soon propitious fire from Heav'n
Consum'd with nimble glance, and grateful steam;
The others not, for his was not sincere;
Whereat hee inly rag'd, and as they talk'd,
Smote him into the midriff with a stone
That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale
Groan'd out his soul with gushing blood effus'd.
Much at that sight was *Adam* in his heart
Dismai'd, and thus in haste to th' angel cri'd.

O teacher, some great mischief hath befall'n
To that meek man, who well had sacrific'd;
Is piety thus and pure devotion paid?

T' whom *Michael* thus, hee also mov'd, repli'd.
These two are brethren, *Adam,* and to come
Out of thy loyns; th' unjust the just hath slain,
For envy that his brothers offering found
From Heav'n acceptance; but the bloody fact
Will be aveng'd, and th' others faith approv'd
Loose no reward, though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore. To which our sire.

Alas, both for the deed and for the cause!
But have I now seen death? Is this the way
I must return to native dust? O sight
Of terror, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!

To whom thus *Michael.* death thou hast seen
In his first shape on man; but many shapes
Of death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim cave, all dismal; yet to sense
More terrible at th' entrance than within.
Some, as thou saw'st, by violent stroke shall die,
By fire, flood, famine, by intemperance more
In meats and drinks which on the earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear; that thou mayst know
What misery th' inabstinence of *Eve*
Shall bring on men. Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeard, sad, noysom, dark,
A lazar-house it seem'd, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseas'd, all maladies
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms
Of heart-sick agony, all feverous kinds,
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs,
Intestin stone and ulcer, colic pangs,
Demoniac frenzy, moping melancholy
And moon-struck madness, pining atrophy,
Marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence,
Dropsies, and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair
Tended the sick busiest from couch to couch;
And over them triumphant death his dart
Shook, but delaid to strike, though oft invok't
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of rock could long
Dry-ey'd behold? *Adam* could not, but wept,
Though not of woman born; compassion quell'd
His best of man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restraind excess,
And scarce recovering words his plaint renew'd,

O miserable mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserv'd!
Better end here unborn. Why is life giv'n
To be thus wrested from us? Rather why
Obtruded on us thus? Who if we knew
What we receive, would either not accept
Life offer'd, or soon beg to lay it down,
Glad to be so dismist in peace. Can thus
Th' image of God in man created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debas't
Under inhuman pains? Why should not man,
Retaining still divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And for his makers image sake exempt?
Their makers image, answerd *Michael* then
Forsook them, when themselves they villifi'd
To serve ungovern'd appetite, and took
His image whom they serv'd, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of *Eve.*
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but their own,
Or if his likeness, by themselves defac't
While they pervert pure natures healthful rules
To loathsom sickness, worthily, since they
Gods image did not reverence in themselves.

I yield it just, said *Adam,* and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To death, and mix with our connatural dust?

There is, said *Michael,* if thou well observe
The rule of not too much, by temperance taught
In what thou eatst and drinkst, seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So maist thou live, till like ripe fruit thou drop
Into thy mothers lap, or be with ease
Gatherd, not harshly pluckt, for death mature:
This is old age; but then thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
To witherd weak and gray; thy senses then
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forgoe,
To what thou hast, and for the aire of youth
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reigne
A melancholly damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy spirits down, and last consume
The balm of life. To whom our ancestor.

Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong
Life much, bent rather how I may be quit
Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge,
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendring up, and patiently attend
My dissolution. *Michael* repli'd,

Nor love thy life, nor hate; but what thou livst
Live well, how long or short permit to Heav'n:
And now prepare thee for another sight.

He lookd and faw a spacious plain, whereon
Were tents of various hue; by some were herds
Of cattel grazing: others, whence the sound
Of instruments that made melodious chime
Was heard, of harp and organ; and who moovd
Their stops and chords was seen: his volant touch
Instinct through all proportions low and high
Fled and pursu'd transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who at the forge
Labouring, two massy clods of iron and brass
Had melted (whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on mountain or in vale,
Down to the veins of earth, thence gliding hot
To som caves mouth, or whether washt by stream
From underground) the liquid ore he dreind
Into fit moulds prepar'd; from which he formd
First his own tools; then, what might else be wrought
Fusil or grav'n in metal. After these,
But on the hither side a different sort
From the high neighbouring hills, which was their seat,
Down to the plain descended: by their guise
Just men they seem'd, and all their study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid, nor those things last which might preserve
Freedom and peace to men: they on the plain
Long had not walkt, when from the tents behold
A bevy of fair women, richly gay
In gems and wanton dress; to the harp they sung
Soft amorous ditties, and in dance came on:
The men though grave, ey'd them, and let their eyes
Rove without rein, till in the amorous net
Fast caught, they lik'd, and each his liking chose;
And now of love they treat till th' eevning star
Loves harbinger appear'd; then all in heat
They light the nuptial torch, and bid invoke
*Hymen,* then first to marriage rites invok't;
With feast and musick all the tents resound.
Such happy interview and fair event
Of love and youth not lost, songs, garlands, flowers,
And charming symphonies attach'd the heart
Of *Adam,* soon enclin'd to admit delight,
The bent of nature; which he thus express'd.

True opener of mine eyes, prime angel blest,
Much better seems this vision, and more hope
Of peaceful days portends, than those two past;
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse,
Here nature seems fulfilld in all her ends.

To whom thus *Michael.* judg not what is best
By pleasure, though to nature seeming meet,
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holy and pure, conformity divine.
Those tents thou sawst so pleasant, were the tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his race
Who slew his brother; studious they appere
Of arts that polish life, inventers rare,
Unmindful of their maker, though his Spirit
Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledg'd none.
Yet they abeauteous ofspring shall beget;
For that fair femal troop thou sawst, that seem'd
Of goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists
Womans domestic honour and chief praise;
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troule the tongue, and roule the eye.
To these that sober race of men, whose lives
Religious titl'd them the sons of God,
Shall yield up all their vertue, all their fame
Ignobly, to the traines and to the smiles
Of these fair atheists, and now swim in joy,
(Erelong to swim at large) and laugh; for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weepe.

To whom thus *Adam* of short joy bereft.
O pity and shame, that they who to live well
Enterd so fair, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenor of mans woe
Holds on the same, from woman to begin.

From mans effeminate slackness it begins,
Said th' angel, who should better hold his place
By wisdome, and superiour gifts receav'd.
But now prepare thee for another scene.

He lookd and saw wide territory spred
Before him, towns, and rural works between,
Cities of men with lofty gates and towrs,
Concours in arms, fierce faces threatning warr,
Giants of mighty bone, and bould emprise;
Part wield their arms, part courb the foaming steed,
Single or in array of battel rang'd
Both horse and foot, nor idely mustring stood;
One way a band select from forage drives
A herd of beeves, fair oxen and fair kine
From a sat meddow ground; or fleecy flock,
Ewes and their bleating lambs over the plain,
Their booty; scarce with life the shepherds flye,
But callin aide, which makes a bloody fray;
With cruel tournament the squadrons joine;
Where cattle pastur'd late, now scatterd lies
With carcasses and arms th' ensanguind field
Deserted: others to a city strong
Lay seige, encampt; by battery, scale, and mine,
Assaulting; others from the wall defend
With dart and jav'lin, stones and sulfurous fire;
On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds.
In other part the scepter'd haralds call
To council in the city gates: anon
Grey-headed men and grave, with warriours mixt,
Assemble, and harangues are heard, but soon
In factious opposition, till at last
Of middle age one rising, eminent
In wise deport, spake much of right and wrong,
Of justice, of religion, truth and peace,
And judgment from above: him old and young
Exploded and had seiz'd with violent hands,
Had not a cloud descending snatch'd him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and oppression, and sword-law
Through all the plain, and refuge none was found.
*Adam* was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turnd full sad; o what are these,
Deaths ministers, not men, who thus deal death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousand fould the sin of him who slew
His brother; for of whom such massacre
Make they but of their brethren, men of men?
But who was that just man, whom had not Heav'n
Rescu'd, had in his righteousness been lost?

To whom thus *Michael.* these are the product
Of those ill mated marriages thou saw'st:
Where good with bad were matcht, who of themselves
Abhor to joyn; and by imprudence mixt,
Produce prodigious births of body or mind.
Such were these giants, men of high renown;
For in those days might only shall be admir'd,
And valour and heroic vertu call'd;
To overcome in battle, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Man-slaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human glory, and for glory done
Of triumph, to be styl'd great conquerours,
Patrons of mankind, Gods, and sons of Gods,
Destroyers rightlier call'd and plagues of men.
Thus fame shall be atchiev'd, renown on earth,
And what most merits fame in silence hid.
But hee the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst
The only righteous in a world perverse,
And therefore hared, therefore so beset
With foes for daring single to be just,
And utter odious truth, that God would come
To judge them with his saints: him the most high
Rapt in a balmy cloud with winged steeds
Did, as thou sawst, receive, to walk with God
High in salvation and the climes of bliss,
Exempt from death; to shew thee what reward
Awaits the good, the rest what punishment?
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.

He look'd, and saw the face of things quite chang'd,
The brazen throat of warr had ceast to roar,
All now was turn'd to jollity and game,
To luxury and riot, feast and dance,
Marrying or prostituting, as befell,
Rape or adultery, where passing fair
Allurd them; thence from cups to civil broiles.
At length a reverend sire among them came,
And of their doings great dislike declar'd,
And testifi'd against their ways; hee oft
Frequented their assemblies, where so met,
Triumphs or festivals, and to them preachd
Conversion and repentance, as to souls.
In prison under judgements imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceas'd
Contending, and remov'd his tents far off;
Then from the mountain hewing timber tall,
Began to build a vessel of huge bulk,
Measur'd by cubit, length, and breadth, and height,
Smeard round with pitch, and in the side a door
Contriv'd, and of provisions laid in large
For man and beast: when loe a wonder strange I
Of every beast, and bird, and insect small
Came seavens, and pairs, and enterd in, as taught
Their order: last the sire, and his three sons
With their four wives; and God made fast the door.
Meanwhile the southwind rose, and with black wings
Wide hovering, all the clouds together drove
From under Heav'n; the hills to their supply
Vapour, and exhalation dusk and moist,
Sent up amain; and now the thick'nd sky
Like a dark ceeling stood; down rush'd the rain
Impetuous, and continu'd till the earth
No more was seen; the floating vessel swum
Uplifted; and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting o're the waves, all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmd, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water roll'd; sea cover'd sea,
Sea without shoar; and in their palaces
Where luxury late reign'd, sea-monsters whelp'd
And stabl'd; of mankind, so numerous late,
All left, in one small bottom swum embark'd.
How didst thou grieve then, *Adam,* to behold
The end of all thy ofspring, end so sad,
Depopulation; thee another floud,
Of tears and sorrow a floud thee also drown'd,
And sunk thee as thy sons; till gently reard
By th' angel, on thy feet thou stoodst at last,
Though comfortless, as when a Father mourns
His children, all in view destroyd at once;
And scarce to th' angel utterdst thus thy plaint.

O visions ill foreseen! Better had I
Liv'd ignorant of future, so had borne
My part of evil only, each days lot
Enough to bear; those now, that were dispenst
The burd'n of many ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining birth
Abortive, to torment me ere their being,
With thought that they must be. Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall
Him or his children, evil he may be sure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent,
And hee the future evil shall no less
In apprehension than in substance feel
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom to warne: those few escap't
Famine and anguish will at last consume
Wandring that watery desert: I had hope
When violence was ceas't, and warr on earth,
All would have then gone well, peace would have crown'd
With length of happy days the race of man;
But I was far deceiv'd; for now I see
Peace to corrupt no less than warr to waste.
How comes it thus? Unfold, celestial guide,
And whether here the race of man will end.
To whom thus *Michael.* those whom last thou sawst
In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
First seen in acts of prowess eminent
And great exploits, but of true vertu void;
Who having spilt much blood, and don much waste
Subduing nations, and achievd thereby
Fame in the world, high titles, and rich prey,
Shall change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,
Surfet, and lust, till wantonness and pride
Raise out of friendship hostil deeds in peace.
The conquerd also, and enslav'd by warr
Shall with their freedom lost all vertu loose
And fear of God, from whom their piety feign'd
In sharp contest of battel found no aide
Against invaders; therefore cool'd in zeale
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,
Worldly or dissolute, on what their Lords
Shall leave them to enjoy; for th' earth shall bear
More than anough, that temperance may be tri'd:
So all shall turn degenerate, all deprav'd,
Justice and temperance, truth and faith forgot;
One man except, the only Son of light
In a dark age, against example good,
Against allurement, custom, and a world
Offended; fearless of reproach and scorn,
Or violence, hee of their wicked ways
Shall them admonish, and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe,
And full of peace, denouncing wrauth to come
On their impenitence; and shall returne
Of them derided, but of God observd
The one just man alive; by his command
Shall build a wondrous ark, as thou beheldst,
To save himself and houshold from amidst
A world devote to universal rack.
No sooner hee with them of man and beast
Select for life shall in the ark be lodg'd,
And shelter'd round, but all the cataracts
Of Heav'n set open on the earth shall pour
Raine day and night, all fountains of the deep
Broke up, shall heave the ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise
Above the highest hills: then shall this mount
Of Paradise by might of waves be moovd
Out of his place, pushd by the horned floud,
With all his verdure spoil'd, and trees adrift
Down the great river to the op'ning gulf,
And there take root an iland salt and bare,
The haunt of seales and orcs, and sea-mews clang.
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctity, if none be thither brought
By men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now what further shall ensue, behold.

He lookd, and saw the ark hull on the floud,
Which now abated, for the clouds were fled,
Driven by a keen north-wind, that blowing dry
Wrinkl'd the face of deluge, as decai'd;
And the deer sun on his wide watery glass
Gaz'd hot, and of the fresh wave largely drew,
As after thirst, which made their flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole
With soft foot towards the deep, who now had stopt
His sluces, as the Heav'n his windows shut.
The ark no more now floats, but seems on ground
Fast on the top of som high mountain fixt.
And now the tops of hills as rocks appear;
With clamor thence the rapid currents drive
Towards the retreating sea their furious tide.
Forthwith from out the ark a raven flies,
And after him, the furer messenger,
A dove sent forth once and agen to spy
Green tree or ground whereon his foot may light;
The second time returning, in his bill
An olive leaf he brings, pacific signe:
Anon dry ground appeers, and from his ark
The ancient sire descends with all his train;
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heav'n, over his head beholds
A dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow
Conspicuous with three listed colours gay,
Betok'ning peace from God, and covenant new.
Whereat the heart of *Adam* erst so sad
Greatly rejoic'd, and thus his joy broke forth.

O thou who future things canst represent
As present, Heav'nly instructor, I revive
At this last sight, assur'd that man shall live
With all the creatures, and their seed preserve.
Far less I now lament for one whole world
Of wicked sons destroyd, than I rejoice
For one man found so perfect and so just,
That God vouchsafes to raise another world
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those colourd streaks in Heaven,
Distended as the brow of God appeas'd,
Or serve they as a flowery verge to binde
The fluid skirts of that same watery cloud.
Least it again dissolve and showr the earth?

To whom th' archangel. Dextrously thou aim'st;
So willingly doth God remit his ire,
Though late repenting him of man deprav'd,
Griev'd at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole earth fill'd with violence, and all flesh
Corrupting each their way; yet those remov'd,
Such grace shall one just man find in his sight,
That he relents, nor to blot out mankind,
And makes a covenant never to destroy
The earth again by flood, nor let the sea
Surpass his bounds, nor rain to drown the world
With man therein or beast; but when he brings
Over the earth a cloud, will therein set
His triple-colour'd bow, whereon to look
And call to mind his covenant: day and night,
Seed time and harvest, heat and hoary frost
Shall hold their course, till fire purge all things new.
Both Heav'n and earth, wherein the just shall dwell.
